***The Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's First Folio***
****************The Merry Wiues of Windsor**********************

This is our 3rd edition of most of these plays.  See the index.


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Merry Wiues of Windsor

by William Shakespeare

July, 2000  [Etext #2237]


***The Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's First Folio***
****************The Merry Wiues of Windsor**********************

*****This file should be named 0ws2010.txt or 0ws2010.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 0ws2011.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 0ws2010a.txt


Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's The first Part of 
Henry the Sixt




Executive Director's Notes:

In addition to the notes below, and so you will *NOT* think all
the spelling errors introduced by the printers of the time have
been corrected, here are the first few lines of Hamlet, as they
are presented herein:

  Barnardo. Who's there?
  Fran. Nay answer me: Stand & vnfold
your selfe

   Bar. Long liue the King

***

As I understand it, the printers often ran out of certain words
or letters they had often packed into a "cliche". . .this is the
original meaning of the term cliche. . .and thus, being unwilling
to unpack the cliches, and thus you will see some substitutions
that look very odd. . .such as the exchanges of u for v, v for u,
above. . .and you may wonder why they did it this way, presuming
Shakespeare did not actually write the play in this manner. . . .

The answer is that they MAY have packed "liue" into a cliche at a
time when they were out of "v"'s. . .possibly having used "vv" in
place of some "w"'s, etc.  This was a common practice of the day,
as print was still quite expensive, and they didn't want to spend
more on a wider selection of characters than they had to.

You will find a lot of these kinds of "errors" in this text, as I
have mentioned in other times and places, many "scholars" have an
extreme attachment to these errors, and many have accorded them a
very high place in the "canon" of Shakespeare.  My father read an
assortment of these made available to him by Cambridge University
in England for several months in a glass room constructed for the
purpose.  To the best of my knowledge he read ALL those available
. . .in great detail. . .and determined from the various changes,
that Shakespeare most likely did not write in nearly as many of a
variety of errors we credit him for, even though he was in/famous
for signing his name with several different spellings.

So, please take this into account when reading the comments below
made by our volunteer who prepared this file:  you may see errors
that are "not" errors. . . .

So. . .with this caveat. . .we have NOT changed the canon errors,
here is the Project Gutenberg Etext of Shakespeare's The first 
Part of Henry the Sixt.

Michael S. Hart
Project Gutenberg
Executive Director


***


Scanner's Notes: What this is and isn't.  This was taken from
a copy of Shakespeare's first folio and it is as close as I can
come in ASCII to the printed text.

The elongated S's have been changed to small s's and the
conjoined ae have been changed to ae.  I have left the spelling,
punctuation, capitalization as close as possible to the
printed text.  I have corrected some spelling mistakes (I have put
together a spelling dictionary devised from the spellings of the
Geneva Bible and Shakespeare's First Folio and have unified
spellings according to this template), typo's and expanded
abbreviations as I have come across them.  Everything within
brackets [] is what I have added.  So if you don't like that
you can delete everything within the brackets if you want a
purer Shakespeare.

Another thing that you should be aware of is that there are textual
differences between various copies of the first folio.  So there may
be differences (other than what I have mentioned above) between
this and other first folio editions.  This is due to the printer's
habit of setting the type and running off a number of copies and
then proofing the printed copy and correcting the type and then
continuing the printing run.  The proof run wasn't thrown away but
incorporated into the printed copies.  This is just the way it is.
The text I have used was a composite of more than 30 different
First Folio editions' best pages.

If you find any scanning errors, out and out typos, punctuation
errors, or if you disagree with my spelling choices please feel
free to email me those errors.  I wish to make this the best
etext possible.  My email address for right now are haradda@aol.com
and davidr@inconnect.com.  I hope that you enjoy this.

David Reed

The Merry Wiues of Windsor

Actus primus, Scena prima.

Enter Iustice Shallow, Slender, Sir Hugh Euans, Master Page,
Falstoffe,
Bardolph, Nym, Pistoll, Anne Page, Mistresse Ford, Mistresse
Page, Simple.


  Shallow. Sir Hugh, perswade me not: I will make a StarChamber
matter of it, if hee were twenty Sir
Iohn Falstoffs, he shall not abuse Robert Shallow
Esquire

   Slen. In the County of Glocester, Iustice of Peace and Coram

   Shal. I (Cosen Slender) and Custalorum

   Slen. I, and Ratolorum too; and a Gentleman borne
(Master Parson) who writes himselfe Armigero, in any
Bill, Warrant, Quittance, or Obligation, Armigero

   Shal. I that I doe, and haue done any time these three
hundred yeeres

   Slen. All his successors (gone before him) hath don't:
and all his Ancestors (that come after him) may: they
may giue the dozen white Luces in their Coate

   Shal. It is an olde Coate

   Euans. The dozen white Lowses doe become an old
Coat well: it agrees well passant: It is a familiar beast to
man, and signifies Loue

   Shal. The Luse is the fresh-fish, the salt-fish, is an old
Coate

   Slen. I may quarter (Coz)

   Shal. You may, by marrying

   Euans. It is marring indeed, if he quarter it

   Shal. Not a whit

   Euan. Yes per-lady: if he ha's a quarter of your coat,
there is but three Skirts for your selfe, in my simple coniectures;
but that is all one: if Sir Iohn Falstaffe haue
committed disparagements vnto you, I am of the Church
and will be glad to do my beneuolence, to make attonements
and compremises betweene you

   Shal. The Councell shall heare it, it is a Riot

   Euan. It is not meet the Councell heare a Riot: there
is no feare of Got in a Riot: The Councell (looke you)
shall desire to heare the feare of Got, and not to heare a
Riot: take your vizaments in that

   Shal. Ha; o'my life, if I were yong againe, the sword
should end it

   Euans. It is petter that friends is the sword, and end
it: and there is also another deuice in my praine, which
peraduenture prings goot discretions with it. There is
Anne Page, which is daughter to Master Thomas Page,
which is pretty virginity

   Slen. Mistris Anne Page? she has browne haire, and
speakes small like a woman

   Euans. It is that ferry person for all the orld, as iust as
you will desire, and seuen hundred pounds of Moneyes,
and Gold, and Siluer, is her Grand-sire vpon his deathsbed,
(Got deliuer to a ioyfull resurrections) giue, when
she is able to ouertake seuenteene yeeres old. It were a
goot motion, if we leaue our pribbles and prabbles, and
desire a marriage betweene Master Abraham, and Mistris
Anne Page

   Slen. Did her Grand-sire leaue her seauen hundred
pound?
  Euan. I, and her father is make her a petter penny

   Slen. I know the young Gentlewoman, she has good
gifts

   Euan. Seuen hundred pounds, and possibilities, is
goot gifts

   Shal. Wel, let vs see honest Mr Page: is Falstaffe there?
  Euan. Shall I tell you a lye? I doe despise a lyer, as I
doe despise one that is false, or as I despise one that is not
true: the Knight Sir Iohn is there, and I beseech you be
ruled by your well-willers: I will peat the doore for Mr.
Page. What hoa? Got-plesse your house heere

   Mr.Page. Who's there?
  Euan. Here is go't's plessing and your friend, and Iustice
Shallow, and heere yong Master Slender: that peraduentures
shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to
your likings

   Mr.Page. I am glad to see your Worships well: I
thanke you for my Venison Master Shallow

   Shal. Master Page, I am glad to see you: much good
doe it your good heart: I wish'd your Venison better, it
was ill killd: how doth good Mistresse Page? and I thank
you alwaies with my heart, la: with my heart

   M.Page. Sir, I thanke you

   Shal. Sir, I thanke you: by yea, and no I doe

   M.Pa. I am glad to see you, good Master Slender

   Slen. How do's your fallow Greyhound, Sir, I heard
say he was out-run on Cotsall

   M.Pa. It could not be iudg'd, Sir

   Slen. You'll not confesse: you'll not confesse

   Shal. That he will not, 'tis your fault, 'tis your fault:
'tis a good dogge

   M.Pa. A Cur, Sir

   Shal. Sir: hee's a good dog, and a faire dog, can there
be more said? he is good, and faire. Is Sir Iohn Falstaffe
heere?
  M.Pa. Sir, hee is within: and I would I could doe a
good office betweene you

   Euan. It is spoke as a Christians ought to speake

   Shal. He hath wrong'd me (Master Page.)
  M.Pa. Sir, he doth in some sort confesse it

   Shal. If it be confessed, it is not redressed; is not that
so (M[aster]. Page?) he hath wrong'd me, indeed he hath, at a
word he hath: beleeue me, Robert Shallow Esquire, saith
he is wronged

   Ma.Pa. Here comes Sir Iohn

   Fal. Now, Master Shallow, you'll complaine of me to
the King?
  Shal. Knight, you haue beaten my men, kill'd my
deere, and broke open my Lodge

   Fal. But not kiss'd your Keepers daughter?
  Shal. Tut, a pin: this shall be answer'd

   Fal. I will answere it strait, I haue done all this:
That is now answer'd

   Shal. The Councell shall know this

   Fal. 'Twere better for you if it were known in councell:
you'll be laugh'd at

   Eu. Pauca verba; (Sir Iohn) good worts

   Fal. Good worts? good Cabidge; Slender, I broke
your head: what matter haue you against me?
  Slen. Marry sir, I haue matter in my head against you,
and against your cony-catching Rascalls, Bardolf, Nym,
and Pistoll

   Bar. You Banbery Cheese

   Slen. I, it is no matter

   Pist. How now, Mephostophilus?
  Slen. I, it is no matter

   Nym. Slice, I say; pauca, pauca: Slice, that's my humor

   Slen. Where's Simple my man? can you tell, Cosen?
  Eua. Peace, I pray you: now let vs vnderstand: there
is three Vmpires in this matter, as I vnderstand; that is,
Master Page (fidelicet Master Page,) & there is my selfe,
(fidelicet my selfe) and the three party is (lastly, and finally)
mine Host of the Garter

   Ma.Pa. We three to hear it, & end it between them

   Euan. Ferry goo't, I will make a priefe of it in my
note-booke, and we wil afterwards orke vpon the cause,
with as great discreetly as we can

   Fal. Pistoll

   Pist. He heares with eares

   Euan. The Teuill and his Tam: what phrase is this?
he heares with eare? why, it is affectations

   Fal. Pistoll, did you picke M[aster]. Slenders purse?
  Slen. I, by these gloues did hee, or I would I might
neuer come in mine owne great chamber againe else, of
seauen groates in mill-sixpences, and two Edward Shouelboords,
that cost me two shilling and two pence a
peece of Yead Miller: by these gloues

   Fal. Is this true, Pistoll?
  Euan. No, it is false, if it is a picke-purse

   Pist. Ha, thou mountaine Forreyner: Sir Iohn, and
Master mine, I combat challenge of this Latine Bilboe:
word of deniall in thy labras here; word of denial; froth,
and scum thou liest

   Slen. By these gloues, then 'twas he

   Nym. Be auis'd sir, and passe good humours: I will
say marry trap with you, if you runne the nut-hooks humor
on me, that is the very note of it

   Slen. By this hat, then he in the red face had it: for
though I cannot remember what I did when you made
me drunke, yet I am not altogether an asse

   Fal. What say you Scarlet, and Iohn?
  Bar. Why sir, (for my part) I say the Gentleman had
drunke himselfe out of his fiue sentences

   Eu. It is his fiue sences: fie, what the ignorance is

   Bar. And being fap, sir, was (as they say) casheerd: and
so conclusions past the Careires

   Slen. I, you spake in Latten then to: but 'tis no matter;
Ile nere be drunk whilst I liue againe, but in honest,
ciuill, godly company for this tricke: if I be drunke, Ile
be drunke with those that haue the feare of God, and not
with drunken knaues

   Euan. So got-udge me, that is a vertuous minde

   Fal. You heare all these matters deni'd, Gentlemen;
you heare it

   Mr.Page. Nay daughter, carry the wine in, wee'll
drinke within

   Slen. Oh heauen: This is Mistresse Anne Page

   Mr.Page. How now Mistris Ford?
  Fal. Mistris Ford, by my troth you are very wel met:
by your leaue good Mistris

   Mr.Page. Wife, bid these gentlemen welcome: come,
we haue a hot Venison pasty to dinner; Come gentlemen,
I hope we shall drinke downe all vnkindnesse

   Slen. I had rather then forty shillings I had my booke
of Songs and Sonnets heere: How now Simple, where
haue you beene? I must wait on my selfe, must I? you
haue not the booke of Riddles about you, haue you?
  Sim. Booke of Riddles? why did you not lend it to
Alice Short-cake vpon Alhallowmas last, a fortnight afore
Michaelmas

   Shal. Come Coz, come Coz, we stay for you: a word
with you Coz: marry this, Coz: there is as 'twere a tender,
a kinde of tender, made a farre-off by Sir Hugh here:
doe you vnderstand me?
  Slen. I Sir, you shall finde me reasonable; if it be so,
I shall doe that that is reason

   Shal. Nay, but vnderstand me

   Slen. So I doe Sir

   Euan. Giue eare to his motions; (Mr. Slender) I will
description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it

   Slen. Nay, I will doe as my Cozen Shallow saies: I
pray you pardon me, he's a Iustice of Peace in his Countrie,
simple though I stand here

   Euan. But that is not the question: the question is
concerning your marriage

   Shal. I, there's the point Sir

   Eu. Marry is it: the very point of it, to Mi[stris]. An Page

   Slen. Why if it be so; I will marry her vpon any reasonable
demands

   Eu. But can you affection the 'oman, let vs command
to know that of your mouth, or of your lips: for diuers
Philosophers hold, that the lips is parcell of the mouth:
therfore precisely, ca[n] you carry your good wil to y maid?
  Sh. Cosen Abraham Slender, can you loue her?
  Slen. I hope sir, I will do as it shall become one that
would doe reason

   Eu. Nay, got's Lords, and his Ladies, you must speake
possitable, if you can carry-her your desires towards her

   Shal. That you must:
Will you, (vpon good dowry) marry her?
  Slen. I will doe a greater thing then that, vpon your
request (Cosen) in any reason

   Shal. Nay conceiue me, conceiue mee, (sweet Coz):
What I doe is to pleasure you (Coz:) can you loue the
maid?
  Slen. I will marry her (Sir) at your request; but if
there bee no great loue in the beginning, yet Heauen
may decrease it vpon better acquaintance, when wee
are married, and haue more occasion to know one another:
I hope vpon familiarity will grow more content:
but if you say mary-her, I will mary-her, that I am freely
dissolued, and dissolutely

   Eu. It is a fery discretion-answere; saue the fall is in
the 'ord, dissolutely: the ort is (according to our meaning)
resolutely: his meaning is good

   Sh. I: I thinke my Cosen meant well

   Sl. I, or else I would I might be hang'd (la.)
  Sh. Here comes faire Mistris Anne; would I were
yong for your sake, Mistris Anne

   An. The dinner is on the Table, my Father desires
your worships company

   Sh. I will wait on him, (faire Mistris Anne.)
  Eu. Od's plessed-wil: I wil not be abse[n]ce at the grace

   An. Wil't please your worship to come in, Sir?
  Sl. No, I thank you forsooth, hartely; I am very well

   An. The dinner attends you, Sir

   Sl. I am not a-hungry, I thanke you, forsooth: goe,
Sirha, for all you are my man, goe wait vpon my Cosen
Shallow: a Iustice of peace sometime may be beholding
to his friend, for a Man; I keepe but three Men, and a
Boy yet, till my Mother be dead: but what though, yet
I liue like a poore Gentleman borne

   An. I may not goe in without your worship: they
will not sit till you come

   Sl. I' faith, ile eate nothing: I thanke you as much as
though I did

   An. I pray you Sir walke in

   Sl. I had rather walke here (I thanke you) I bruiz'd
my shin th' other day, with playing at Sword and Dagger
with a Master of Fence (three veneys for a dish of
stew'd Prunes) and by my troth, I cannot abide the smell
of hot meate since. Why doe your dogs barke so? be
there Beares ith' Towne?
  An. I thinke there are, Sir, I heard them talk'd of

   Sl. I loue the sport well, but I shall as soone quarrell
at it, as any man in England: you are afraid if you see the
Beare loose, are you not?
  An. I indeede Sir

   Sl. That's meate and drinke to me now: I haue seene
Saskerson loose, twenty times, and haue taken him by the
Chaine: but (I warrant you) the women haue so cride
and shrekt at it, that it past: But women indeede, cannot
abide 'em, they are very ill-fauour'd rough things

   Ma.Pa. Come, gentle M[aster]. Slender, come; we stay for you

   Sl. Ile eate nothing, I thanke you Sir

   Ma.Pa. By cocke and pie, you shall not choose, Sir:
come, come

   Sl. Nay, pray you lead the way

   Ma.Pa. Come on, Sir

   Sl. Mistris Anne: your selfe shall goe first

   An. Not I Sir, pray you keepe on

   Sl. Truely I will not goe first: truely-la: I will not
doe you that wrong

   An. I pray you Sir

   Sl. Ile rather be vnmannerly, then troublesome: you
doe your selfe wrong indeede-la.

Exeunt.


Scena Secunda.

Enter Euans, and Simple.

  Eu. Go your waies, and aske of Doctor Caius house,
which is the way; and there dwels one Mistris Quickly;
which is in the manner of his Nurse; or his dry-Nurse; or
his Cooke; or his Laundry; his Washer, and his Ringer

   Si. Well Sir

   Eu. Nay, it is petter yet: giue her this letter; for it is
a 'oman that altogeathers acquainta[n]ce with Mistris Anne
Page; and the Letter is to desire, and require her to solicite
your Masters desires, to Mistris Anne Page: I pray
you be gon: I will make an end of my dinner; ther's Pippins
and Cheese to come.

Exeunt.


Scena Tertia.

Enter Falstaffe, Host, Bardolfe, Nym, Pistoll, Page.

  Fal. Mine Host of the Garter?
  Ho. What saies my Bully Rooke? speake schollerly,
and wisely

   Fal. Truely mine Host; I must turne away some of my
followers

   Ho. Discard, (bully Hercules) casheere; let them wag;
trot, trot

   Fal. I sit at ten pounds a weeke

   Ho. Thou'rt an Emperor (Cesar, Keiser and Pheazar)
I will entertaine Bardolfe: he shall draw; he shall tap; said
I well (bully Hector?)
  Fa. Doe so (good mine Host.)
  Ho. I haue spoke; let him follow; let me see thee froth,
and liue: I am at a word: follow

   Fal. Bardolfe, follow him: a Tapster is a good trade:
an old Cloake, makes a new Ierkin: a wither'd Seruingman,
a fresh Tapster: goe, adew

   Ba. It is a life that I haue desir'd: I will thriue

   Pist. O base hungarian wight: wilt y the spigot wield

   Ni. He was gotten in drink: is not the humor co[n]ceited?
  Fal. I am glad I am so acquit of this Tinderbox: his
Thefts were too open: his filching was like an vnskilfull
Singer, he kept not time

   Ni. The good humor is to steale at a minutes rest

   Pist. Conuay: the wise it call: Steale? foh: a fico for
the phrase

   Fal. Well sirs, I am almost out at heeles

   Pist. Why then let Kibes ensue

   Fal. There is no remedy: I must conicatch, I must shift

   Pist. Yong Rauens must haue foode

   Fal. Which of you know Ford of this Towne?
  Pist. I ken the wight: he is of substance good

   Fal. My honest Lads, I will tell you what I am about

   Pist. Two yards, and more

   Fal. No quips now Pistoll: (Indeede I am in the waste
two yards about: but I am now about no waste: I am about
thrift) briefely: I doe meane to make loue to Fords
wife: I spie entertainment in her: shee discourses: shee
carues: she giues the leere of inuitation: I can construe
the action of her familier stile, & the hardest voice of her
behauior (to be english'd rightly) is, I am Sir Iohn Falstafs

   Pist. He hath studied her will; and translated her will:
out of honesty, into English

   Ni. The Anchor is deepe: will that humor passe?
  Fal. Now, the report goes, she has all the rule of her
husbands Purse: he hath a legend of Angels

   Pist. As many diuels entertaine: and to her Boy say I

   Ni. The humor rises: it is good: humor me the angels

   Fal. I haue writ me here a letter to her: & here another
to Pages wife, who euen now gaue mee good eyes
too; examind my parts with most iudicious illiads: sometimes
the beame of her view, guilded my foote: sometimes
my portly belly

   Pist. Then did the Sun on dung-hill shine

   Ni. I thanke thee for that humour

   Fal. O she did so course o're my exteriors with such
a greedy intention, that the appetite of her eye, did seeme
to scorch me vp like a burning-glasse: here's another
letter to her: She beares the Purse too: She is a Region
in Guiana: all gold, and bountie: I will be Cheaters to
them both, and they shall be Exchequers to mee: they
shall be my East and West Indies, and I will trade to
them both: Goe, beare thou this Letter to Mistris Page;
and thou this to Mistris Ford: we will thriue (Lads) we
will thriue

   Pist. Shall I Sir Pandarus of Troy become,
And by my side weare Steele? then Lucifer take all

   Ni. I will run no base humor: here take the humor-Letter;
I will keepe the hauior of reputation

   Fal. Hold Sirha, beare you these Letters tightly,
Saile like my Pinnasse to these golden shores.
Rogues, hence, auaunt, vanish like haile-stones; goe,
Trudge; plod away ith' hoofe: seeke shelter, packe:
Falstaffe will learne the honor of the age,
French-thrift, you Rogues, my selfe, and skirted Page

   Pist. Let Vultures gripe thy guts: for gourd, and
Fullam holds: & high and low beguiles the rich & poore,
Tester ile haue in pouch when thou shalt lacke,
Base Phrygian Turke

   Ni. I haue opperations,
Which be humors of reuenge

   Pist. Wilt thou reuenge?
  Ni. By Welkin, and her Star

   Pist. With wit, or Steele?
  Ni. With both the humors, I:
I will discusse the humour of this Loue to Ford

   Pist. And I to Page shall eke vnfold
How Falstaffe (varlet vile)
His Doue will proue; his gold will hold,
And his soft couch defile

   Ni. My humour shall not coole: I will incense Ford
to deale with poyson: I will possesse him with yallownesse,
for the reuolt of mine is dangerous: that is my
true humour

   Pist. Thou art the Mars of Malecontents: I second
thee: troope on.

Exeunt.


Scoena Quarta.

Enter Mistris Quickly, Simple, Iohn Rugby, Doctor, Caius, Fenton.

  Qu. What, Iohn Rugby, I pray thee goe to the Casement,
and see if you can see my Master, Master Docter
Caius comming: if he doe (I' faith) and finde any body
in the house; here will be an old abusing of Gods patience,
and the Kings English

   Ru. Ile goe watch

   Qu. Goe, and we'll haue a posset for't soone at night,
(in faith) at the latter end of a Sea-cole-fire: An honest,
willing, kinde fellow, as euer seruant shall come in house
withall: and I warrant you, no tel-tale, nor no breedebate:
his worst fault is, that he is giuen to prayer; hee is
something peeuish that way: but no body but has his
fault: but let that passe. Peter Simple, you say your
name is?
  Si. I: for fault of a better

   Qu. And Master Slender's your Master?
  Si. I forsooth

   Qu. Do's he not weare a great round Beard, like a
Glouers pairing-knife?
  Si. No forsooth: he hath but a little wee-face; with
a little yellow Beard: a Caine colourd Beard

   Qu. A softly-sprighted man, is he not?
  Si. I forsooth: but he is as tall a man of his hands, as
any is betweene this and his head: he hath fought with
a Warrener

   Qu. How say you: oh, I should remember him: do's
he not hold vp his head (as it were?) and strut in his gate?
  Si. Yes indeede do's he

   Qu. Well, heauen send Anne Page, no worse fortune:
Tell Master Parson Euans, I will doe what I can for your
Master: Anne is a good girle, and I wish -
  Ru. Out alas: here comes my Master

   Qu. We shall all be shent: Run in here, good young
man: goe into this Closset: he will not stay long: what
Iohn Rugby? Iohn: what Iohn I say? goe Iohn, goe enquire
for my Master, I doubt he be not well, that hee
comes not home: (and downe, downe, adowne'a. &c

   Ca. Vat is you sing? I doe not like des-toyes: pray
you goe and vetch me in my Closset, vnboyteere verd;
a Box, a greene-a-Box: do intend vat I speake? a greene-a-Box

   Qu. I forsooth ile fetch it you:
I am glad hee went not in himselfe: if he had found the
yong man he would haue bin horne-mad

   Ca. Fe, fe, fe, fe, mai foy, il fait for ehando, Ie man voi a le
Court la grand affaires

   Qu. Is it this Sir?
  Ca. Ouy mette le au mon pocket, depeech quickly:
Vere is dat knaue Rugby?
  Qu. What Iohn Rugby, Iohn?
  Ru. Here Sir

   Ca. You are Iohn Rugby, and you are Iacke Rugby:
Come, take-a-your Rapier, and come after my heele to
the Court

   Ru. 'Tis ready Sir, here in the Porch

   Ca. By my trot: I tarry too long: od's-me: que ay ie
oublie: dere is some Simples in my Closset, dat I vill not
for the varld I shall leaue behinde

   Qu. Ay-me, he'll finde the yong man there, & be mad

   Ca. O Diable, Diable: vat is in my Closset?
Villanie, Laroone: Rugby, my Rapier

   Qu. Good Master be content

   Ca. Wherefore shall I be content-a?
  Qu. The yong man is an honest man

   Ca. What shall de honest man do in my Closset: dere
is no honest man dat shall come in my Closset

   Qu. I beseech you be not so flegmaticke: heare the
truth of it. He came of an errand to mee, from Parson
Hugh

   Ca. Vell

   Si. I forsooth: to desire her to -
  Qu. Peace, I pray you

   Ca. Peace-a-your tongue: speake-a-your Tale

   Si. To desire this honest Gentlewoman (your Maid)
to speake a good word to Mistris Anne Page, for my Master
in the way of Marriage

   Qu. This is all indeede-la: but ile nere put my finger
in the fire, and neede not

   Ca. Sir Hugh send-a you? Rugby, ballow mee some
paper: tarry you a littell-a-while

   Qui. I am glad he is so quiet: if he had bin throughly
moued, you should haue heard him so loud, and so melancholly:
but notwithstanding man, Ile doe yoe your
Master what good I can: and the very yea, & the no is, y
French Doctor my Master, (I may call him my Master,
looke you, for I keepe his house; and I wash, ring, brew,
bake, scowre, dresse meat and drinke, make the beds, and
doe all my selfe.)
  Simp. 'Tis a great charge to come vnder one bodies
hand

   Qui. Are you auis'd o'that? you shall finde it a great
charge: and to be vp early, and down late: but notwithstanding,
(to tell you in your eare, I wold haue no words
of it) my Master himselfe is in loue with Mistris Anne
Page: but notwithstanding that I know Ans mind, that's
neither heere nor there

   Caius. You, Iack'Nape: giue-'a this Letter to Sir
Hugh, by gar it is a shallenge: I will cut his troat in de
Parke, and I will teach a scuruy Iackanape Priest to
meddle, or make:- you may be gon: it is not good
you tarry here: by gar I will cut all his two stones: by
gar, he shall not haue a stone to throw at his dogge

   Qui. Alas: he speakes but for his friend

   Caius. It is no matter 'a ver dat: do not you tell-a-me
dat I shall haue Anne Page for my selfe? by gar, I vill
kill de Iack-Priest: and I haue appointed mine Host of
de Iarteer to measure our weapon: by gar, I wil my selfe
haue Anne Page

   Qui. Sir, the maid loues you, and all shall bee well:
We must giue folkes leaue to prate: what the goodier

   Caius. Rugby, come to the Court with me: by gar, if
I haue not Anne Page, I shall turne your head out of my
dore: follow my heeles, Rugby

   Qui. You shall haue An-fooles head of your owne:
No, I know Ans mind for that: neuer a woman in Windsor
knowes more of Ans minde then I doe, nor can doe
more then I doe with her, I thanke heauen

   Fenton. Who's with in there, hoa?
  Qui. Who's there, I troa? Come neere the house I
pray you

   Fen. How now (good woman) how dost thou?
  Qui. The better that it pleases your good Worship
to aske?
  Fen. What newes? how do's pretty Mistris Anne?
  Qui. In truth Sir, and shee is pretty, and honest, and
gentle, and one that is your friend, I can tell you that by
the way, I praise heauen for it

   Fen. Shall I doe any good thinkst thou? shall I not
loose my suit?
  Qui. Troth Sir, all is in his hands aboue: but notwithstanding
(Master Fenton) Ile be sworne on a booke
shee loues you: haue not your Worship a wart aboue
your eye?
  Fen. Yes marry haue I, what of that?
  Qui. Wel, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such
another Nan; (but (I detest) an honest maid as euer
broke bread: wee had an howres talke of that wart; I
shall neuer laugh but in that maids company: but (indeed)
shee is giuen too much to Allicholy and musing:
but for you - well - goe too -
  Fen. Well: I shall see her to day: hold, there's money
for thee: Let mee haue thy voice in my behalfe: if
thou seest her before me, commend me. -
  Qui. Will I? I faith that wee will: And I will tell
your Worship more of the Wart, the next time we haue
confidence, and of other wooers

   Fen. Well, fare-well, I am in great haste now

   Qui. Fare-well to your Worship: truely an honest
Gentleman: but Anne loues him not: for I know Ans
minde as well as another do's: out vpon't: what haue I
forgot.

Enter.


Actus Secundus. Scoena Prima.

Enter Mistris Page, Mistris Ford, Master Page, Master Ford,
Pistoll, Nim,
Quickly, Host, Shallow.

  Mist.Page. What, haue scap'd Loue-letters in the
holly-day-time of my beauty, and am I now a subiect
for them? let me see?
Aske me no reason why I loue you, for though Loue vse Reason
for his precisian, hee admits him not for his Counsailour:
you are not yong, no more am I: goe to then, there's simpathie:
you are merry, so am I: ha, ha, then there's more simpathie:
you loue sacke, and so do I: would you desire better simpathie?
Let it suffice thee (Mistris Page) at the least if the Loue of
Souldier can suffice, that I loue thee: I will not say pitty mee,
'tis not a Souldier-like phrase; but I say, loue me:
By me, thine owne true Knight, by day or night:
Or any kinde of light, with all his might,
For thee to fight. Iohn Falstaffe.
What a Herod of Iurie is this? O wicked, wicked world:
One that is well-nye worne to peeces with age
To show himselfe a yong Gallant? What an vnwaied
Behauiour hath this Flemish drunkard pickt (with
The Deuills name) out of my conuersation, that he dares
In this manner assay me? why, hee hath not beene thrice
In my Company: what should I say to him? I was then
Frugall of my mirth: (heauen forgiue mee:) why Ile
Exhibit a Bill in the Parliament for the putting downe
of men: how shall I be reueng'd on him? for reueng'd I
will be? as sure as his guts are made of puddings

   Mis.Ford. Mistris Page, trust me, I was going to your
house

   Mis.Page. And trust me, I was comming to you: you
looke very ill

   Mis.Ford. Nay Ile nere beleeue that; I haue to shew
to the contrary

   Mis.Page. 'Faith but you doe in my minde

   Mis.Ford. Well: I doe then: yet I say, I could shew
you to the contrary: O Mistris Page, giue mee some
counsaile

   Mis.Page. What's the matter, woman?
  Mi.Ford. O woman: if it were not for one trifling respect,
I could come to such honour

   Mi.Page. Hang the trifle (woman) take the honour:
what is it? dispence with trifles: what is it?
  Mi.Ford. If I would but goe to hell, for an eternall
moment, or so: I could be knighted

   Mi.Page. What thou liest? Sir Alice Ford? these
Knights will hacke, and so thou shouldst not alter the article
of thy Gentry

   Mi.Ford. Wee burne day-light: heere, read, read:
perceiue how I might bee knighted, I shall thinke the
worse of fat men, as long as I haue an eye to make difference
of mens liking: and yet hee would not sweare:
praise womens modesty: and gaue such orderly and welbehaued
reproofe to al vncomelinesse, that I would haue
sworne his disposition would haue gone to the truth of
his words: but they doe no more adhere and keep place
together, then the hundred Psalms to the tune of Greensleeues:
What tempest (I troa) threw this Whale, (with
so many Tuns of oyle in his belly) a'shoare at Windsor?
How shall I bee reuenged on him? I thinke the best way
were, to entertaine him with hope, till the wicked fire
of lust haue melted him in his owne greace: Did you euer
heare the like?
  Mis.Page. Letter for letter; but that the name of
Page and Ford differs: to thy great comfort in this mystery
of ill opinions, heere's the twyn-brother of thy Letter:
but let thine inherit first, for I protest mine neuer
shall: I warrant he hath a thousand of these Letters, writ
with blancke-space for different names (sure more): and
these are of the second edition: hee will print them out
of doubt: for he cares not what hee puts into the presse,
when he would put vs two: I had rather be a Giantesse,
and lye vnder Mount Pelion: Well; I will find you twentie
lasciuious Turtles ere one chaste man

   Mis.Ford. Why this is the very same: the very hand:
the very words: what doth he thinke of vs?
  Mis.Page. Nay I know not: it makes me almost readie
to wrangle with mine owne honesty: Ile entertaine
my selfe like one that I am not acquainted withall: for
sure vnlesse hee know some straine in mee, that I know
not my selfe, hee would neuer haue boorded me in this
furie

   Mi.Ford. Boording, call you it? Ile bee sure to keepe
him aboue decke

   Mi.Page. So will I: if hee come vnder my hatches,
Ile neuer to Sea againe: Let's bee reueng'd on him: let's
appoint him a meeting: giue him a show of comfort in
his Suit, and lead him on with a fine baited delay, till hee
hath pawn'd his horses to mine Host of the Garter

   Mi.Ford. Nay, I wil consent to act any villany against
him, that may not sully the charinesse of our honesty: oh
that my husband saw this Letter: it would giue eternall
food to his iealousie

   Mis.Page. Why look where he comes; and my good
man too: hee's as farre from iealousie, as I am from giuing
him cause, and that (I hope) is an vnmeasurable distance

   Mis.Ford. You are the happier woman

   Mis.Page. Let's consult together against this greasie
Knight: Come hither

   Ford. Well: I hope, it be not so

   Pist. Hope is a curtall-dog in some affaires:
Sir Iohn affects thy wife

   Ford. Why sir, my wife is not young

   Pist. He wooes both high and low, both rich & poor,
both yong and old, one with another (Ford) he loues the
Gally-mawfry (Ford) perpend

   Ford. Loue my wife?
  Pist. With liuer, burning hot: preuent:
Or goe thou like Sir Acteon he, with
Ring-wood at thy heeles: O, odious is the name

   Ford. What name Sir?
  Pist. The horne I say: Farewell:
Take heed, haue open eye, for theeues doe foot by night.
Take heed, ere sommer comes, or Cuckoo-birds do sing.
Away sir Corporall Nim:
Beleeue it (Page) he speakes sence

   Ford. I will be patient: I will find out this

   Nim. And this is true: I like not the humor of lying:
hee hath wronged mee in some humors: I should haue
borne the humour'd Letter to her: but I haue a sword:
and it shall bite vpon my necessitie: he loues your wife;
There's the short and the long: My name is Corporall
Nim: I speak, and I auouch; 'tis true: my name is Nim:
and Falstaffe loues your wife: adieu, I loue not the humour
of bread and cheese: adieu

   Page. The humour of it (quoth 'a?) heere's a fellow
frights English out of his wits

   Ford. I will seeke out Falstaffe

   Page. I neuer heard such a drawling-affecting rogue

   Ford. If I doe finde it: well

   Page. I will not beleeue such a Cataian, though the
Priest o' th' Towne commended him for a true man

   Ford. 'Twas a good sensible fellow: well

   Page. How now Meg?
  Mist.Page. Whether goe you (George?) harke you

   Mis.Ford. How now (sweet Frank) why art thou melancholy?
  Ford. I melancholy? I am not melancholy:
Get you home: goe

   Mis.Ford. Faith, thou hast some crochets in thy head,
Now: will you goe, Mistris Page?
  Mis.Page. Haue with you: you'll come to dinner
George? Looke who comes yonder: shee shall bee our
Messenger to this paltrie Knight

   Mis.Ford. Trust me, I thought on her: shee'll fit it

   Mis.Page. You are come to see my daughter Anne?
  Qui. I forsooth: and I pray how do's good Mistresse
Anne?
  Mis.Page. Go in with vs and see: we haue an houres
talke with you

   Page. How now Master Ford?
  For. You heard what this knaue told me, did you not?
  Page. Yes, and you heard what the other told me?
  Ford. Doe you thinke there is truth in them?
  Pag. Hang 'em slaues: I doe not thinke the Knight
would offer it: But these that accuse him in his intent
towards our wiues, are a yoake of his discarded men: very
rogues, now they be out of seruice

   Ford. Were they his men?
  Page. Marry were they

   Ford. I like it neuer the beter for that,
Do's he lye at the Garter?
  Page. I marry do's he: if hee should intend this voyage
toward my wife, I would turne her loose to him;
and what hee gets more of her, then sharpe words, let it
lye on my head

   Ford. I doe not misdoubt my wife: but I would bee
loath to turne them together: a man may be too confident:
I would haue nothing lye on my head: I cannot
be thus satisfied

   Page. Looke where my ranting-Host of the Garter
comes: there is eyther liquor in his pate, or mony in his
purse, when hee lookes so merrily: How now mine
Host?
  Host. How now Bully-Rooke: thou'rt a Gentleman
Caueleiro Iustice, I say

   Shal. I follow, (mine Host) I follow: Good-euen,
and twenty (good Master Page.) Master Page, wil you go
with vs? we haue sport in hand

   Host. Tell him Caueleiro-Iustice: tell him Bully-Rooke

   Shall. Sir, there is a fray to be fought, betweene Sir
Hugh the Welch Priest, and Caius the French Doctor

   Ford. Good mine Host o'th' Garter: a word with you

   Host. What saist thou, my Bully-Rooke?
  Shal. Will you goe with vs to behold it? My merry
Host hath had the measuring of their weapons; and (I
thinke) hath appointed them contrary places: for (beleeue
mee) I heare the Parson is no Iester: harke, I will
tell you what our sport shall be

   Host. Hast thou no suit against my Knight? my guest-Caualeire?
  Shal. None, I protest: but Ile giue you a pottle of
burn'd sacke, to giue me recourse to him, and tell him
my name is Broome: onely for a iest

   Host. My hand, (Bully:) thou shalt haue egresse and
regresse, (said I well?) and thy name shall be Broome. It
is a merry Knight: will you goe An-heires?
  Shal. Haue with you mine Host

   Page. I haue heard the French-man hath good skill
in his Rapier

   Shal. Tut sir: I could haue told you more: In these
times you stand on distance: your Passes, Stoccado's, and
I know not what: 'tis the heart (Master Page) 'tis heere,
'tis heere: I haue seene the time, with my long-sword, I
would haue made you fowre tall fellowes skippe like
Rattes

   Host. Heere boyes, heere, heere: shall we wag?
  Page. Haue with you: I had rather heare them scold,
then fight

   Ford. Though Page be a secure foole, and stands so
firmely on his wiues frailty; yet, I cannot put-off my opinion
so easily: she was in his company at Pages house:
and what they made there, I know not. Well, I wil looke
further into't, and I haue a disguise, to sound Falstaffe; if
I finde her honest, I loose not my labor: if she be otherwise,
'tis labour well bestowed.

Exeunt.


Scoena Secunda.


Enter Falstaffe, Pistoll, Robin, Quickly, Bardolffe, Ford.

  Fal. I will not lend thee a penny

   Pist. Why then the world's mine Oyster, which I,
with sword will open

   Fal. Not a penny: I haue beene content (Sir,) you
should lay my countenance to pawne: I haue grated vpon
my good friends for three Repreeues for you, and
your Coach-fellow Nim; or else you had look'd through
the grate, like a Geminy of Baboones: I am damn'd in
hell, for swearing to Gentlemen my friends, you were
good Souldiers, and tall-fellowes. And when Mistresse
Briget lost the handle of her Fan, I took't vpon mine honour
thou hadst it not

   Pist. Didst not thou share? hadst thou not fifteene
pence?
  Fal. Reason, you roague, reason: thinkst thou Ile endanger
my soule, gratis? at a word, hang no more about
mee, I am no gibbet for you: goe, a short knife, and a
throng, to your Mannor of Pickt-hatch: goe, you'll not
beare a Letter for mee you roague? you stand vpon your
honor: why, (thou vnconfinable basenesse) it is as much
as I can doe to keepe the termes of my honor precise:
I, I, I my selfe sometimes, leauing the feare of heauen on
the left hand, and hiding mine honor in my necessity, am
faine to shufflle: to hedge, and to lurch, and yet, you
Rogue, will en-sconce your raggs; your Cat-a-Mountaine-lookes,
your red-lattice phrases, and your boldbeating-oathes,
vnder the shelter of your honor? you
will not doe it? you?

  Pist. I doe relent: what would thou more of man?

  Robin. Sir, here's a woman would speake with you

   Fal. Let her approach

   Qui. Giue your worship good morrow

   Fal. Good-morrow, good-wife

   Qui. Not so, and't please your worship

   Fal. Good maid then

   Qui. Ile be sworne,
As my mother was the first houre I was borne

   Fal. I doe beleeue the swearer; what with me?

  Qui. Shall I vouch-safe your worship a word, or
two?

  Fal. Two thousand (faire woman) and ile vouchsafe
thee the hearing

   Qui. There is one Mistresse Ford, (Sir) I pray come a
little neerer this waies: I my selfe dwell with M[aster]. Doctor
Caius:
  Fal. Well, on; Mistresse Ford, you say

   Qui. Your worship saies very true: I pray your worship
come a little neerer this waies

   Fal. I warrant thee, no-bodie heares: mine owne
people, mine owne people

   Qui. Are they so? heauen-blesse them, and make
them his Seruants

   Fal. Well; Mistresse Ford, what of her?

  Qui. Why, Sir; shee's a good-creature; Lord, Lord,
your Worship's a wanton: well: heauen forgiue you,
and all of vs, I pray -

   Fal. Mistresse Ford: come, Mistresse Ford

   Qui. Marry this is the short, and the long of it: you
haue brought her into such a Canaries, as 'tis wonderfull:
the best Courtier of them all (when the Court lay
at Windsor) could neuer haue brought her to such a Canarie:
yet there has beene Knights, and Lords, and Gentlemen,
with their Coaches; I warrant you Coach after
Coach, letter after letter, gift after gift, smelling so sweetly;
all Muske, and so rushling, I warrant you, in silke
and golde, and in such alligant termes, and in such wine
and suger of the best, and the fairest, that would haue
wonne any womans heart: and I warrant you, they could
neuer get an eye-winke of her: I had my selfe twentie
Angels giuen me this morning, but I defie all Angels (in
any such sort, as they say) but in the way of honesty: and
I warrant you, they could neuer get her so much as sippe
on a cup with the prowdest of them all, and yet there has
beene Earles: nay, (which is more) Pentioners, but I
warrant you all is one with her

   Fal. But what saies shee to mee? be briefe my good
sheeMercurie

   Qui. Marry, she hath receiu'd your Letter: for the
which she thankes you a thousand times; and she giues
you to notifie, that her husband will be absence from his
house, betweene ten and eleuen

   Fal. Ten, and eleuen

   Qui. I, forsooth: and then you may come and see the
picture (she sayes) that you wot of: Master Ford her husband
will be from home: alas, the sweet woman leades
an ill life with him: hee's a very iealousie-man; she leads
a very frampold life with him, (good hart.)

   Fal. Ten, and eleuen.
Woman, commend me to her, I will not faile her

   Qui. Why, you say well: But I haue another messenger
to your worship: Mistresse Page hath her heartie
commendations to you to: and let mee tell you in your
eare, shee's as fartuous a ciuill modest wife, and one (I
tell you) that will not misse you morning nor euening
prayer, as any is in Windsor, who ere bee the other: and
shee bade me tell your worship, that her husband is seldome
from home, but she hopes there will come a time.
I neuer knew a woman so doate vpon a man; surely I
thinke you haue charmes, la: yes in truth

   Fal. Not I, I assure thee; setting the attraction of my
good parts aside, I haue no other charmes

   Qui. Blessing on your heart for't

   Fal. But I pray thee tell me this: has Fords wife, and
Pages wife acquainted each other, how they loue me?

  Qui. That were a iest indeed: they haue not so little
grace I hope, that were a tricke indeed: But Mistris Page
would desire you to send her your little Page of al loues:
her husband has a maruellous infectio[n] to the little Page:
and truely Master Page is an honest man: neuer a wife in
Windsor leades a better life then she do's: doe what shee
will, say what she will, take all, pay all, goe to bed when
she list, rise when she list, all is as she will: and truly she
deserues it; for if there be a kinde woman in Windsor, she
is one: you must send her your Page, no remedie

   Fal. Why, I will

   Qu. Nay, but doe so then, and looke you, hee may
come and goe betweene you both: and in any case haue
a nay-word, that you may know one anothers minde,
and the Boy neuer neede to vnderstand any thing; for
'tis not good that children should know any wickednes:
olde folkes you know, haue discretion, as they say, and
know the world

   Fal. Farethee-well, commend mee to them both:
there's my purse, I am yet thy debter: Boy, goe along
with this woman, this newes distracts me

   Pist. This Puncke is one of Cupids Carriers,
Clap on more sailes, pursue: vp with your sights:
Giue fire: she is my prize, or Ocean whelme them all

   Fal. Saist thou so (old Iacke) go thy waies: Ile make
more of thy olde body then I haue done: will they yet
looke after thee? wilt thou after the expence of so much
money, be now a gainer? good Body, I thanke thee: let
them say 'tis grossely done, so it bee fairely done, no
matter

   Bar. Sir Iohn, there's one Master Broome below would
faine speake with you, and be acquainted with you; and
hath sent your worship a mornings draught of Sacke

   Fal. Broome is his name?

   Bar. I Sir

   Fal. Call him in: such Broomes are welcome to mee,
that ore'flowes such liquor: ah ha, Mistresse Ford and Mistresse
Page, haue I encompass'd you? goe to, via

   Ford. 'Blesse you sir

   Fal. And you sir: would you speake with me?

   Ford. I make bold, to presse, with so little preparation
vpon you

   Fal. You'r welcome, what's your will? giue vs leaue
Drawer

   Ford. Sir, I am a Gentleman that haue spent much,
my name is Broome

   Fal. Good Master Broome, I desire more acquaintance
of you

   Ford. Good Sir Iohn, I sue for yours: not to charge
you, for I must let you vnderstand, I thinke my selfe in
better plight for a Lender, then you are: the which hath
something emboldned me to this vnseason'd intrusion:
for they say, if money goe before, all waies doe lye
open

   Fal. Money is a good Souldier (Sir) and will on

   Ford. Troth, and I haue a bag of money heere troubles
me: if you will helpe to beare it (Sir Iohn) take all,
or halfe, for easing me of the carriage

   Fal. Sir, I know not how I may deserue to bee your
Porter

   Ford. I will tell you sir, if you will giue mee the hearing

   Fal. Speake (good Master Broome) I shall be glad to
be your Seruant

   Ford. Sir, I heare you are a Scholler: (I will be briefe
with you) and you haue been a man long knowne to me,
though I had neuer so good means as desire, to make my
selfe acquainted with you. I shall discouer a thing to
you, wherein I must very much lay open mine owne imperfection:
but (good Sir Iohn) as you haue one eye vpon
my follies, as you heare them vnfolded, turne another
into the Register of your owne, that I may passe with a
reproofe the easier, sith you your selfe know how easie it
is to be such an offender

   Fal. Very well Sir, proceed

   Ford. There is a Gentlewoman in this Towne, her
husbands name is Ford

   Fal. Well Sir

   Ford. I haue long lou'd her, and I protest to you, bestowed
much on her: followed her with a doating obseruance:
Ingross'd opportunities to meete her: fee'd euery
slight occasion that could but nigardly giue mee
sight of her: not only bought many presents to giue her,
but haue giuen largely to many, to know what shee
would haue giuen: briefly, I haue pursu'd her, as Loue
hath pursued mee, which hath beene on the wing of all
occasions: but whatsoeuer I haue merited, either in my
minde, or in my meanes, meede I am sure I haue receiued
none, vnlesse Experience be a Iewell, that I haue purchased
at an infinite rate, and that hath taught mee to say
this,
``Loue like a shadow flies, when substance Loue pursues,
``Pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues

   Fal. Haue you receiu'd no promise of satisfaction at
her hands?
  Ford. Neuer

   Fal. Haue you importun'd her to such a purpose?
  Ford. Neuer

   Fal. Of what qualitie was your loue then?
  Ford. Like a fair house, built on another mans ground,
so that I haue lost my edifice, by mistaking the place,
where I erected it

   Fal. To what purpose haue you vnfolded this to me?
  For. When I haue told you that, I haue told you all:
Some say, that though she appeare honest to mee, yet in
other places shee enlargeth her mirth so farre, that there
is shrewd construction made of her. Now (Sir Iohn) here
is the heart of my purpose: you are a gentleman of excellent
breeding, admirable discourse, of great admittance,
authenticke in your place and person, generally
allow'd for your many war-like, court-like, and learned
preparations

   Fal. O Sir

   Ford. Beleeue it, for you know it: there is money,
spend it, spend it, spend more; spend all I haue, onely
giue me so much of your time in enchange of it, as to lay
an amiable siege to the honesty of this Fords wife: vse
your Art of wooing; win her to consent to you: if any
man may, you may as soone as any

   Fal. Would it apply well to the vehemency of your
affection that I should win what you would enioy? Methinkes
you prescribe to your selfe very preposterously

   Ford. O, vnderstand my drift: she dwells so securely
on the excellency of her honor, that the folly of my soule
dares not present it selfe: shee is too bright to be look'd
against. Now, could I come to her with any detection
in my hand; my desires had instance and argument to
commend themselues, I could driue her then from the
ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage-vow,
and a thousand other her defences, which now are tootoo
strongly embattaild against me: what say you too't,
Sir Iohn?
  Fal. Master Broome, I will first make bold with your
money: next, giue mee your hand: and last, as I am a
gentleman, you shall, if you will, enioy Fords wife

   Ford. O good Sir

   Fal. I say you shall

   Ford. Want no money (Sir Iohn) you shall want none

   Fal. Want no Mistresse Ford (Master Broome) you shall
want none: I shall be with her (I may tell you) by her
owne appointment, euen as you came in to me, her assistant,
or goe-betweene, parted from me: I say I shall be
with her betweene ten and eleuen: for at that time the
iealious-rascally-knaue her husband will be forth: come
you to me at night, you shall know how I speed

   Ford. I am blest in your acquaintance: do you know
Ford Sir?
  Fal. Hang him (poore Cuckoldly knaue) I know
him not: yet I wrong him to call him poore: They say
the iealous wittolly-knaue hath masses of money, for
the which his wife seemes to me well-fauourd: I will vse
her as the key of the Cuckoldly-rogues Coffer, & ther's
my haruest-home

   Ford. I would you knew Ford, sir, that you might auoid
him, if you saw him

   Fal. Hang him, mechanicall-salt-butter rogue; I wil
stare him out of his wits: I will awe-him with my cudgell:
it shall hang like a Meteor ore the Cuckolds horns:
Master Broome, thou shalt know, I will predominate ouer
the pezant, and thou shalt lye with his wife. Come
to me soone at night: Ford's a knaue, and I will aggrauate
his stile: thou (Master Broome) shalt know him for
knaue, and Cuckold. Come to me soone at night

   Ford. What a damn'd Epicurian-Rascall is this? my
heart is ready to cracke with impatience: who saies this
is improuident iealousie? my wife hath sent to him, the
howre is fixt, the match is made: would any man haue
thought this? see the hell of hauing a false woman: my
bed shall be abus'd, my Coffers ransack'd, my reputation
gnawne at, and I shall not onely receiue this villanous
wrong, but stand vnder the adoption of abhominable
termes, and by him that does mee this wrong: Termes,
names: Amaimon sounds well: Lucifer, well: Barbason,
well: yet they are Diuels additions, the names of fiends:
But Cuckold, Wittoll, Cuckold? the Diuell himselfe
hath not such a name. Page is an Asse, a secure Asse; hee
will trust his wife, hee will not be iealous: I will rather
trust a Fleming with my butter, Parson Hugh the Welshman
with my Cheese, an Irish-man with my Aqua-vitae-bottle,
or a Theefe to walke my ambling gelding, then
my wife with her selfe. Then she plots, then shee ruminates,
then shee deuises: and what they thinke in their
hearts they may effect; they will breake their hearts but
they will effect. Heauen bee prais'd for my iealousie:
eleuen o' clocke the howre, I will preuent this, detect
my wife, bee reueng'd on Falstaffe, and laugh at Page. I
will about it, better three houres too soone, then a mynute
too late: fie, fie, fie: Cuckold, Cuckold, Cuckold.

Enter.


Scena Tertia.

Enter Caius, Rugby, Page, Shallow, Slender, Host.

  Caius. Iacke Rugby

   Rug. Sir

   Caius. Vat is the clocke, Iack

   Rug. 'Tis past the howre (Sir) that Sir Hugh promis'd
to meet

   Cai. By gar, he has saue his soule, dat he is no-come:
hee has pray his Pible well, dat he is no-come: by gar
(Iack Rugby) he is dead already, if he be come

   Rug. Hee is wise Sir: hee knew your worship would
kill him if he came

   Cai. By gar, de herring is no dead, so as I vill kill
him: take your Rapier, (Iacke) I vill tell you how I vill
kill him

   Rug. Alas sir, I cannot fence

   Cai. Villaine, take your Rapier

   Rug. Forbeare: heer's company

   Host. 'Blesse thee, bully-Doctor

   Shal. 'Saue you Mr. Doctor Caius

   Page. Now good Mr. Doctor

   Slen. 'Giue you good-morrow, sir

   Caius. Vat be all you one, two, tree, fowre, come for?
  Host. To see thee fight, to see thee foigne, to see thee
trauerse, to see thee heere, to see thee there, to see thee
passe thy puncto, thy stock, thy reuerse, thy distance, thy
montant: Is he dead, my Ethiopian? Is he dead, my Francisco?
ha Bully? what saies my Esculapius? my Galien? my
heart of Elder? ha? is he dead bully-Stale? is he dead?
  Cai. By gar, he is de Coward-Iack-Priest of de vorld:
he is not show his face

   Host. Thou art a Castalion-king-Vrinall: Hector of
Greece (my Boy)
  Cai. I pray you beare witnesse, that me haue stay,
sixe or seuen, two tree howres for him, and hee is nocome

   Shal. He is the wiser man (M[aster]. Doctor) he is a curer of
soules, and you a curer of bodies: if you should fight, you
goe against the haire of your professions: is it not true,
Master Page?
  Page. Master Shallow; you haue your selfe beene a
great fighter, though now a man of peace

   Shal. Body-kins M[aster]. Page, though I now be old, and
of the peace; if I see a sword out, my finger itches to
make one: though wee are Iustices, and Doctors, and
Church-men (M[aster]. Page) wee haue some salt of our youth
in vs, we are the sons of women (M[aster]. Page.)
  Page. 'Tis true, Mr. Shallow

   Shal. It wil be found so, (M[aster]. Page:) M[aster]. Doctor
Caius,
I am come to fetch you home: I am sworn of the peace:
you haue show'd your selfe a wise Physician, and Sir
Hugh hath showne himselfe a wise and patient Churchman:
you must goe with me, M[aster]. Doctor

   Host. Pardon, Guest-Iustice; a Mounseur Mocke-water

   Cai. Mock-vater? vat is dat?
  Host. Mock-water, in our English tongue, is Valour
(Bully.)
  Cai. By gar, then I haue as much Mock-vater as de
Englishman: scuruy-Iack-dog-Priest: by gar, mee vill
cut his eares

   Host. He will Clapper-claw thee tightly (Bully.)
  Cai. Clapper-de-claw? vat is dat?
  Host. That is, he will make thee amends

   Cai. By-gar, me doe looke hee shall clapper-de-claw
me, for by-gar, me vill haue it

   Host. And I will prouoke him to't, or let him wag

   Cai. Me tanck you for dat

   Host. And moreouer, (Bully) but first, Mr. Ghuest,
and M[aster]. Page, & eeke Caualeiro Slender, goe you through
the Towne to Frogmore

   Page. Sir Hugh is there, is he?
  Host. He is there, see what humor he is in: and I will
bring the Doctor about by the Fields: will it doe well?
  Shal. We will doe it

   All. Adieu, good M[aster]. Doctor

   Cai. By-gar, me vill kill de Priest, for he speake for a
Iack-an-Ape to Anne Page

   Host. Let him die: sheath thy impatience: throw cold
water on thy Choller: goe about the fields with mee
through Frogmore, I will bring thee where Mistris Anne
Page is, at a Farm-house a Feasting: and thou shalt wooe
her: Cride-game, said I well?
  Cai. By-gar, mee dancke you vor dat: by gar I loue
you: and I shall procure 'a you de good Guest: de Earle,
de Knight, de Lords, de Gentlemen, my patients

   Host. For the which, I will be thy aduersary toward
Anne Page: said I well?
  Cai. By-gar, 'tis good: vell said

   Host. Let vs wag then

   Cai. Come at my heeles, Iack Rugby.

Exeunt.


Actus Tertius. Scoena Prima.

Enter Euans, Simple, Page, Shallow, Slender, Host, Caius, Rugby.

  Euans. I pray you now, good Master Slenders seruingman,
and friend Simple by your name; which way haue
you look'd for Master Caius, that calls himselfe Doctor
of Phisicke

   Sim. Marry Sir, the pittie-ward, the Parke-ward:
euery way: olde Windsor way, and euery way but the
Towne-way

   Euan. I most fehemently desire you, you will also
looke that way

   Sim. I will sir

   Euan. 'Plesse my soule: how full of Chollors I am, and
trempling of minde: I shall be glad if he haue deceiued
me: how melancholies I am? I will knog his Vrinalls about
his knaues costard, when I haue good oportunities
for the orke: 'Plesse my soule: To shallow Riuers to whose
falls: melodious Birds sings Madrigalls: There will we make
our Peds of Roses: and a thousand fragrant posies. To shallow:
'Mercie on mee, I haue a great dispositions to cry.
Melodious birds sing Madrigalls: - When as I sat in Pabilon:
and a thousand vagram Posies. To shallow, &c

   Sim. Yonder he is comming, this way, Sir Hugh

   Euan. Hee's welcome: To shallow Riuers, to whose fals:
Heauen prosper the right: what weapons is he?
  Sim. No weapons, Sir: there comes my Master, Mr.
Shallow, and another Gentleman; from Frogmore, ouer
the stile, this way

   Euan. Pray you giue mee my gowne, or else keepe it
in your armes

   Shal. How now Master Parson? good morrow good
Sir Hugh: keepe a Gamester from the dice, and a good
Studient from his booke, and it is wonderfull

   Slen. Ah sweet Anne Page

   Page. 'Saue you, good Sir Hugh

   Euan. 'Plesse you from his mercy-sake, all of you

   Shal. What? the Sword, and the Word?
Doe you study them both, Mr. Parson?
  Page. And youthfull still, in your doublet and hose,
this raw-rumaticke day?
  Euan. There is reasons, and causes for it

   Page. We are come to you, to doe a good office, Mr.
Parson

   Euan. Fery-well: what is it?
  Page. Yonder is a most reuerend Gentleman; who
(be-like) hauing receiued wrong by some person, is at
most odds with his owne grauity and patience, that euer
you saw

   Shal. I haue liued foure-score yeeres, and vpward: I
neuer heard a man of his place, grauity, and learning, so
wide of his owne respect

   Euan. What is he?
  Page. I thinke you know him: Mr. Doctor Caius the
renowned French Physician

   Euan. Got's-will, and his passion of my heart: I had
as lief you would tell me of a messe of porredge

   Page. Why?
  Euan. He has no more knowledge in Hibocrates and
  Galen , and hee is a knaue besides: a cowardly knaue, as
you would desires to be acquainted withall

   Page. I warrant you, hee's the man should fight with
him

   Slen. O sweet Anne Page

   Shal. It appeares so by his weapons: keepe them asunder:
here comes Doctor Caius

   Page. Nay good Mr. Parson, keepe in your weapon

   Shal. So doe you, good Mr. Doctor

   Host. Disarme them, and let them question: let them
keepe their limbs whole, and hack our English

   Cai. I pray you let-a-mee speake a word with your
eare; vherefore vill you not meet-a me?
  Euan. Pray you vse your patience in good time

   Cai. By-gar, you are de Coward: de Iack dog: Iohn
Ape

   Euan. Pray you let vs not be laughing-stocks to other
mens humors: I desire you in friendship, and I will one
way or other make you amends: I will knog your Vrinal
about your knaues Cogs-combe

   Cai. Diable: Iack Rugby: mine Host de Iarteer: haue I
not stay for him, to kill him? haue I not at de place I did
appoint?
  Euan. As I am a Christians-soule, now looke you:
this is the place appointed, Ile bee iudgement by mine
Host of the Garter

   Host. Peace, I say, Gallia and Gaule, French & Welch,
Soule-Curer, and Body-Curer

   Cai. I, dat is very good, excellant

   Host. Peace, I say: heare mine Host of the Garter,
Am I politicke? Am I subtle? Am I a Machiuell?
Shall I loose my Doctor? No, hee giues me the Potions
and the Motions. Shall I loose my Parson? my Priest?
my Sir Hugh? No, he giues me the Prouerbes, and the
No-verbes. Giue me thy hand (Celestiall) so: Boyes of
Art, I haue deceiu'd you both: I haue directed you to
wrong places: your hearts are mighty, your skinnes are
whole, and let burn'd Sacke be the issue: Come, lay their
swords to pawne: Follow me, Lad of peace, follow, follow,
follow

   Shal. Trust me, a mad Host: follow Gentlemen, follow

   Slen. O sweet Anne Page

   Cai. Ha' do I perceiue dat? Haue you make-a-de-sot
of vs, ha, ha?
  Eua. This is well, he has made vs his vlowting-stog:
I desire you that we may be friends: and let vs knog our
praines together to be reuenge on this same scall
scuruy-cogging-companion
the Host of the Garter

   Cai. By gar, with all my heart: he promise to bring
me where is Anne Page: by gar he deceiue me too

   Euan. Well, I will smite his noddles: pray you follow.

Scena Secunda.

Mist.Page, Robin, Ford, Page, Shallow, Slender, Host, Euans,
Caius.

  Mist.Page. Nay keepe your way (little Gallant) you
were wont to be a follower, but now you are a Leader:
whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your masters
heeles?
  Rob. I had rather (forsooth) go before you like a man,
then follow him like a dwarfe

   M.Pa. O you are a flattering boy, now I see you'l be a
(Courtier

   Ford. Well met mistris Page, whether go you

   M.Pa. Truly Sir, to see your wife, is she at home?
  Ford. I, and as idle as she may hang together for want
of company: I thinke if your husbands were dead, you
two would marry

   M.Pa. Be sure of that, two other husbands

   Ford. Where had you this pretty weather-cocke?
  M.Pa. I cannot tell what (the dickens) his name is my
husband had him of, what do you cal your Knights name sirrah?
  Rob. Sir Iohn Falstaffe

   Ford. Sir Iohn Falstaffe

   M.Pa. He, he, I can neuer hit on's name; there is such a
league betweene my goodman, and he: is your Wife at home
indeed?
  Ford. Indeed she is

   M.Pa. By your leaue sir, I am sicke till I see her

   Ford. Has Page any braines? Hath he any eies? Hath he
any thinking? Sure they sleepe, he hath no vse of them:
why this boy will carrie a letter twentie mile as easie, as
a Canon will shoot point-blanke twelue score: hee peeces
out his wiues inclination: he giues her folly motion
and aduantage: and now she's going to my wife, & Falstaffes
boy with her: A man may heare this showre sing
in the winde; and Falstaffes boy with her: good plots,
they are laide, and our reuolted wiues share damnation
together. Well, I will take him, then torture my wife,
plucke the borrowed vaile of modestie from the so-seeming
Mist[ris]. Page, divulge Page himselfe for a secure and
wilfull Acteon, and to these violent proceedings all my
neighbors shall cry aime. The clocke giues me my Qu,
and my assurance bids me search, there I shall finde Falstaffe:
I shall be rather praisd for this, then mock'd, for
it is as possitiue, as the earth is firme, that Falstaffe is
there: I will go

   Shal. Page, &c. Well met Mr Ford

   Ford. Trust me, a good knotte; I haue good cheere at
home, and I pray you all go with me

   Shal. I must excuse my selfe Mr Ford

   Slen. And so must I Sir,
We haue appointed to dine with Mistris Anne,
And I would not breake with her for more mony
Then Ile speake of

   Shal. We haue linger'd about a match betweene An
Page, and my cozen Slender, and this day wee shall haue
our answer

   Slen. I hope I haue your good will Father Page

   Pag. You haue Mr Slender, I stand wholly for you,
But my wife (Mr Doctor) is for you altogether

   Cai. I be-gar, and de Maid is loue-a-me: my nursh-a-Quickly
tell me so mush

   Host. What say you to yong Mr Fenton? He capers,
he dances, he has eies of youth: he writes verses, hee
speakes holliday, he smels April and May, he wil carry't,
he will carry't, 'tis in his buttons, he will carry't

   Page. Not by my consent I promise you. The Gentleman
is of no hauing, hee kept companie with the wilde
Prince, and Pointz: he is of too high a Region, he knows
too much: no, hee shall not knit a knot in his fortunes,
with the finger of my substance: if he take her, let him
take her simply: the wealth I haue waits on my consent,
and my consent goes not that way

   Ford. I beseech you heartily, some of you goe home
with me to dinner: besides your cheere you shall haue
sport, I will shew you a monster: Mr Doctor, you shal
go, so shall you Mr Page, and you Sir Hugh

   Shal. Well, fare you well:
We shall haue the freer woing at Mr Pages

   Cai. Go home Iohn Rugby, I come anon

   Host. Farewell my hearts, I will to my honest Knight
Falstaffe, and drinke Canarie with him

   Ford. I thinke I shall drinke in Pipe-wine first with
him, Ile make him dance. Will you go Gentles?
  All. Haue with you, to see this Monster.



Scena Tertia.

Enter M.Ford, M.Page, Seruants, Robin, Falstaffe, Ford, Page,
Caius,
Euans.

  Mist.Ford. What Iohn, what Robert

   M.Page. Quickly, quickly: Is the Buck-basket -
  Mis.Ford. I warrant. What Robin I say

   Mis.Page. Come, come, come

   Mist.Ford. Heere, set it downe

   M.Pag. Giue your men the charge, we must be briefe

   M.Ford. Marrie, as I told you before (Iohn & Robert)
be ready here hard-by in the Brew-house, & when I sodainly
call you, come forth, and (without any pause, or
staggering) take this basket on your shoulders: y done,
trudge with it in all hast, and carry it among the Whitsters
in Dotchet Mead, and there empty it in the muddie
ditch, close by the Thames side

   M.Page. You will do it?
  M.Ford. I ha told them ouer and ouer, they lacke no direction.
Be gone, and come when you are call'd

   M.Page. Here comes little Robin

   Mist.Ford. How now my Eyas-Musket, what newes with you?
  Rob. My M[aster]. Sir Iohn is come in at your backe doore
(Mist[ris]. Ford, and requests your company

   M.Page. You litle Iack-a-lent, haue you bin true to vs
  Rob. I, Ile be sworne: my Master knowes not of your
being heere: and hath threatned to put me into euerlasting
liberty, if I tell you of it: for he sweares he'll turne
me away

   Mist.Pag. Thou'rt a good boy: this secrecy of thine
shall be a Tailor to thee, and shal make thee a new doublet
and hose. Ile go hide me

   Mi.Ford. Do so: go tell thy Master, I am alone: Mistris
Page, remember you your Qu

   Mist.Pag. I warrant thee, if I do not act it, hisse me

   Mist.Ford. Go-too then: we'l vse this vnwholsome
humidity, this grosse-watry Pumpion; we'll teach him
to know Turtles from Iayes

   Fal. Haue I caught thee, my heauenly Iewell? Why
now let me die, for I haue liu'd long enough: This is the
period of my ambition: O this blessed houre

   Mist.Ford. O sweet Sir Iohn

   Fal. Mistris Ford, I cannot cog, I cannot prate (Mist[ris].
Ford) now shall I sin in my wish; I would thy Husband
were dead, Ile speake it before the best Lord, I would
make thee my Lady

   Mist.Ford. I your Lady Sir Iohn? Alas, I should bee a
pittifull Lady

   Fal. Let the Court of France shew me such another:
I see how thine eye would emulate the Diamond: Thou
hast the right arched-beauty of the brow, that becomes
the Ship-tyre, the Tyre-valiant, or any Tire of Venetian
admittance

   Mist.Ford. A plaine Kerchiefe, Sir Iohn:
My browes become nothing else, nor that well neither

   Fal. Thou art a tyrant to say so: thou wouldst make
an absolute Courtier, and the firme fixture of thy foote,
would giue an excellent motion to thy gate, in a semicircled
Farthingale. I see what thou wert if Fortune thy
foe, were not Nature thy friend: Come, thou canst not
hide it

   Mist.Ford. Beleeue me, ther's no such thing in me

   Fal. What made me loue thee? Let that perswade
thee. Ther's something extraordinary in thee: Come, I
cannot cog, and say thou art this and that, like a-manie
of these lisping-hauthorne buds, that come like women
in mens apparrell, and smell like Bucklers-berry in simple
time: I cannot, but I loue thee, none but thee; and
thou deseru'st it

   M.Ford. Do not betray me sir, I fear you loue M[istris]. Page

   Fal. Thou mightst as well say, I loue to walke by the
Counter-gate, which is as hatefull to me, as the reeke of
a Lime-kill

   Mis.Ford. Well, heauen knowes how I loue you,
And you shall one day finde it

   Fal. Keepe in that minde, Ile deserue it

   Mist.Ford. Nay, I must tell you, so you doe;
Or else I could not be in that minde

   Rob. Mistris Ford, Mistris Ford: heere's Mistris Page at
the doore, sweating, and blowing, and looking wildely,
and would needs speake with you presently

   Fal. She shall not see me, I will ensconce mee behinde
the Arras

   M.Ford. Pray you do so, she's a very tatling woman.
Whats the matter? How now?
  Mist.Page. O mistris Ford what haue you done?
You'r sham'd, y'are ouerthrowne, y'are vndone for euer

   M.Ford. What's the matter, good mistris Page?
  M.Page. O weladay, mist[ris]. Ford, hauing an honest man
to your husband, to giue him such cause of suspition

   M.Ford. What cause of suspition?
  M.Page. What cause of suspition? Out vpon you:
How am I mistooke in you?
  M.Ford. Why (alas) what's the matter?
  M.Page. Your husband's comming hether (Woman)
with all the Officers in Windsor, to search for a Gentleman,
that he sayes is heere now in the house; by your
consent to take an ill aduantage of his absence: you are
vndone

   M.Ford. 'Tis not so, I hope

   M.Page. Pray heauen it be not so, that you haue such
a man heere: but 'tis most certaine your husband's comming,
with halfe Windsor at his heeles, to serch for such
a one, I come before to tell you: If you know your selfe
cleere, why I am glad of it: but if you haue a friend here,
conuey, conuey him out. Be not amaz'd, call all your
senses to you, defend your reputation, or bid farwell to
your good life for euer

   M.Ford. What shall I do? There is a Gentleman my
deere friend: and I feare not mine owne shame so much,
as his perill. I had rather then a thousand pound he were
out of the house

   M.Page. For shame, neuer stand (you had rather, and
you had rather:) your husband's heere at hand, bethinke
you of some conueyance: in the house you cannot hide
him. Oh, how haue you deceiu'd me? Looke, heere is a
basket, if he be of any reasonable stature, he may creepe
in heere, and throw fowle linnen vpon him, as if it were
going to bucking: Or it is whiting time, send him by
your two men to Datchet-Meade

   M.Ford. He's too big to go in there: what shall I do?
  Fal. Let me see't, let me see't, O let me see't:
Ile in, Ile in: Follow your friends counsell, Ile in

   M.Page. What Sir Iohn Falstaffe? Are these your Letters,
Knight?
  Fal. I loue thee, helpe mee away: let me creepe in
heere: ile neuer -
  M.Page. Helpe to couer your master (Boy:) Call
your men (Mist[ris]. Ford.) You dissembling Knight

   M.Ford. What Iohn, Robert, Iohn; Go, take vp these
cloathes heere, quickly: Wher's the Cowle-staffe? Look
how you drumble? Carry them to the Landresse in Datchet
mead: quickly, come

   Ford. 'Pray you come nere: if I suspect without cause,
Why then make sport at me, then let me be your iest,
I deserue it: How now? Whether beare you this?
  Ser. To the Landresse forsooth?
  M.Ford. Why, what haue you to doe whether they
beare it? You were best meddle with buck-washing

   Ford. Buck? I would I could wash my selfe of y Buck:
Bucke, bucke, bucke, I bucke: I warrant you Bucke,
And of the season too; it shall appeare.
Gentlemen, I haue dream'd to night, Ile tell you my
dreame: heere, heere, heere bee my keyes, ascend my
Chambers, search, seeke, finde out: Ile warrant wee'le
vnkennell the Fox. Let me stop this way first: so, now
vncape

   Page. Good master Ford, be contented:
You wrong your selfe too much

   Ford. True (master Page) vp Gentlemen,
You shall see sport anon:
Follow me Gentlemen

   Euans. This is fery fantasticall humors and iealousies

   Caius. By gar, 'tis no-the fashion of France:
It is not iealous in France

   Page. Nay follow him (Gentlemen) see the yssue of
his search

   Mist.Page. Is there not a double excellency in this?
  Mist.Ford. I know not which pleases me better,
That my husband is deceiued, or Sir Iohn

   Mist.Page. What a taking was hee in, when your
husband askt who was in the basket?
  Mist.Ford. I am halfe affraid he will haue neede of
washing: so throwing him into the water, will doe him
a benefit

   Mist.Page. Hang him dishonest rascall: I would all
of the same straine, were in the same distresse

   Mist.Ford. I thinke my husband hath some speciall
suspition of Falstaffs being heere: for I neuer saw him so
grosse in his iealousie till now

   Mist.Page. I will lay a plot to try that, and wee will
yet haue more trickes with Falstaffe: his dissolute disease
will scarse obey this medicine

   Mis.Ford. Shall we send that foolishion Carion, Mist[ris].
Quickly to him, and excuse his throwing into the water,
and giue him another hope, to betray him to another
punishment?
  Mist.Page. We will do it: let him be sent for to morrow
eight a clocke to haue amends

   Ford. I cannot finde him: may be the knaue bragg'd
of that he could not compasse

   Mis.Page. Heard you that?
  Mis.Ford. You vse me well, M[aster]. Ford? Do you?
  Ford. I, I do so

   M.Ford. Heauen make you better then your thoghts
  Ford. Amen

   Mi.Page. You do your selfe mighty wrong (M[aster]. Ford)
  Ford. I, I: I must beare it

   Eu. If there be any pody in the house, & in the chambers,
and in the coffers, and in the presses: heauen forgiue
my sins at the day of iudgement

   Caius. Be gar, nor I too: there is no-bodies

   Page. Fy, fy, M[aster]. Ford, are you not asham'd? What spirit,
what diuell suggests this imagination? I wold not ha
your distemper in this kind, for y welth of Windsor castle

   Ford. 'Tis my fault (M[aster]. Page) I suffer for it

   Euans. You suffer for a pad conscience: your wife is
as honest a o'mans, as I will desires among fiue thousand,
and fiue hundred too

   Cai. By gar, I see 'tis an honest woman

   Ford. Well, I promisd you a dinner: come, come, walk
in the Parke, I pray you pardon me: I wil hereafter make
knowne to you why I haue done this. Come wife, come
Mi[stris]. Page, I pray you pardon me. Pray hartly pardon me

   Page. Let's go in Gentlemen, but (trust me) we'l mock
him: I doe inuite you to morrow morning to my house
to breakfast: after we'll a Birding together, I haue a fine
Hawke for the bush. Shall it be so:
  Ford. Any thing

   Eu. If there is one, I shall make two in the Companie
  Ca. If there be one, or two, I shall make-a-theturd

   Ford. Pray you go, M[aster]. Page

   Eua. I pray you now remembrance to morrow on the
lowsie knaue, mine Host

   Cai. Dat is good by gar, withall my heart

   Eua. A lowsie knaue, to haue his gibes, and his mockeries.

Exeunt.


Scoena Quarta.

Enter Fenton, Anne, Page, Shallow, Slender, Quickly, Page,
Mist.Page.

  Fen. I see I cannot get thy Fathers loue,
Therefore no more turne me to him (sweet Nan.)
  Anne. Alas, how then?
  Fen. Why thou must be thy selfe.
He doth obiect, I am too great of birth,
And that my state being gall'd with my expence,
I seeke to heale it onely by his wealth.
Besides these, other barres he layes before me,
My Riots past, my wilde Societies,
And tels me 'tis a thing impossible
I should loue thee, but as a property

   An. May be he tels you true.
No, heauen so speed me in my time to come,
Albeit I will confesse, thy Fathers wealth
Was the first motiue that I woo'd thee (Anne:)
Yet wooing thee, I found thee of more valew
Then stampes in Gold, or summes in sealed bagges:
And 'tis the very riches of thy selfe,
That now I ayme at

   An. Gentle M[aster]. Fenton,
Yet seeke my Fathers loue, still seeke it sir,
If opportunity and humblest suite
Cannot attaine it, why then harke you hither

   Shal. Breake their talke Mistris Quickly.
My Kinsman shall speake for himselfe

   Slen. Ile make a shaft or a bolt on't, slid, tis but venturing

   Shal. Be not dismaid

   Slen. No, she shall not dismay me:
I care not for that, but that I am affeard

   Qui. Hark ye, M[aster]. Slender would speak a word with you
  An. I come to him. This is my Fathers choice:
O what a world of vilde ill-fauour'd faults
Lookes handsome in three hundred pounds a yeere?
  Qui. And how do's good Master Fenton?
Pray you a word with you

   Shal. Shee's comming; to her Coz:
O boy, thou hadst a father

   Slen. I had a father (M[istris]. An) my vncle can tel you good
iests of him: pray you Vncle, tel Mist[ris]. Anne the iest how
my Father stole two Geese out of a Pen, good Vnckle

   Shal. Mistris Anne, my Cozen loues you

   Slen. I that I do, as well as I loue any woman in Glocestershire

   Shal. He will maintaine you like a Gentlewoman

   Slen. I that I will, come cut and long-taile, vnder the
degree of a Squire

   Shal. He will make you a hundred and fiftie pounds
ioynture

   Anne. Good Maister Shallow let him woo for himselfe

   Shal. Marrie I thanke you for it: I thanke you for
that good comfort: she cals you (Coz) Ile leaue you

   Anne. Now Master Slender

   Slen. Now good Mistris Anne

   Anne. What is your will?
  Slen. My will? Odd's-hartlings, that's a prettie
iest indeede: I ne're made my Will yet (I thanke Heauen:)
I am not such a sickely creature, I giue Heauen
praise

   Anne. I meane (M[aster]. Slender) what wold you with me?
  Slen. Truely, for mine owne part, I would little or
nothing with you: your father and my vncle hath made
motions: if it be my lucke, so; if not, happy man bee his
dole, they can tell you how things go, better then I can:
you may aske your father, heere he comes

   Page. Now Mr Slender; Loue him daughter Anne.
Why how now? What does Mr Fenten here?
You wrong me Sir, thus still to haunt my house.
I told you Sir, my daughter is disposd of

   Fen. Nay Mr Page, be not impatient

   Mist.Page. Good M[aster]. Fenton, come not to my child

   Page. She is no match for you

   Fen. Sir, will you heare me?
  Page. No, good M[aster]. Fenton.
Come M[aster]. Shallow: Come sonne Slender, in;
Knowing my minde, you wrong me (M[aster]. Fenton.)
  Qui. Speake to Mistris Page

   Fen. Good Mist[ris]. Page, for that I loue your daughter
In such a righteous fashion as I do,
Perforce, against all checkes, rebukes, and manners,
I must aduance the colours of my loue,
And not retire. Let me haue your good will

   An. Good mother, do not marry me to yond foole

   Mist.Page. I meane it not, I seeke you a better husband

   Qui. That's my master, M[aster]. Doctor

   An. Alas I had rather be set quick i'th earth,
And bowl'd to death with Turnips

   Mist.Page. Come, trouble not your selfe good M[aster].
Fenton, I will not be your friend, nor enemy:
My daughter will I question how she loues you,
And as I finde her, so am I affected:
Till then, farewell Sir, she must needs go in,
Her father will be angry

   Fen. Farewell gentle Mistris: farewell Nan

   Qui. This is my doing now: Nay, saide I, will you
cast away your childe on a Foole, and a Physitian:
Looke on M[aster]. Fenton, this is my doing

   Fen. I thanke thee: and I pray thee once to night,
Giue my sweet Nan this Ring: there's for thy paines

   Qui. Now heauen send thee good fortune, a kinde
heart he hath: a woman would run through fire & water
for such a kinde heart. But yet, I would my Maister
had Mistris Anne, or I would M[aster]. Slender had her: or (in
sooth) I would M[aster]. Fenton had her; I will do what I can
for them all three, for so I haue promisd, and Ile bee as
good as my word, but speciously for M[aster]. Fenton. Well, I
must of another errand to Sir Iohn Falstaffe from my two
Mistresses: what a beast am I to slacke it.

Exeunt.

Scena Quinta.

Enter Falstaffe, Bardolfe, Quickly, Ford.

  Fal. Bardolfe I say

   Bar. Heere Sir

   Fal. Go, fetch me a quart of Sacke, put a tost in't.
Haue I liu'd to be carried in a Basket like a barrow of
butchers Offall? and to be throwne in the Thames? Wel,
if I be seru'd such another tricke, Ile haue my braines
'tane out and butter'd, and giue them to a dogge for a
New-yeares gift. The rogues slighted me into the riuer
with as little remorse, as they would haue drown'de a
blinde bitches Puppies, fifteene i'th litter: and you may
know by my size, that I haue a kinde of alacrity in sinking:
if the bottome were as deepe as hell, I shold down.
I had beene drown'd, but that the shore was sheluy and
shallow: a death that I abhorre: for the water swelles a
man; and what a thing should I haue beene, when I
had beene swel'd? I should haue beene a Mountaine of
Mummie

   Bar. Here's M[istris]. Quickly Sir to speake with you

   Fal. Come, let me poure in some Sack to the Thames
water: for my bellies as cold as if I had swallow'd snowbals,
for pilles to coole the reines. Call her in

   Bar. Come in woman

   Qui. By your leaue: I cry you mercy?
Giue your worship good morrow

   Fal. Take away these Challices:
Go, brew me a pottle of Sacke finely

   Bard. With Egges, Sir?
  Fal. Simple of it selfe: Ile no Pullet-Spersme in my
brewage. How now?
  Qui. Marry Sir, I come to your worship from M[istris]. Ford

   Fal. Mist[ris]. Ford? I haue had Ford enough: I was thrown
into the Ford; I haue my belly full of Ford

   Qui. Alas the day, (good-heart) that was not her
fault: she do's so take on with her men; they mistooke
their erection

   Fal. So did I mine, to build vpon a foolish Womans promise

   Qui. Well, she laments Sir for it, that it would yern
your heart to see it: her husband goes this morning a
birding; she desires you once more to come to her, betweene
eight and nine: I must carry her word quickely,
she'll make you amends I warrant you

   Fal. Well, I will visit her, tell her so: and bidde her
thinke what a man is: Let her consider his frailety, and
then iudge of my merit

   Qui. I will tell her

   Fal. Do so. Betweene nine and ten saist thou?
  Qui. Eight and nine Sir

   Fal. Well, be gone: I will not misse her

   Qui. Peace be with you Sir

   Fal. I meruaile I heare not of Mr Broome: he sent me
word to stay within: I like his money well.
Oh, heere he comes

   Ford. Blesse you Sir

   Fal. Now M[aster]. Broome, you come to know
What hath past betweene me, and Fords wife

   Ford. That indeed (Sir Iohn) is my businesse

   Fal. M[aster]. Broome I will not lye to you,
I was at her house the houre she appointed me

   Ford. And sped you Sir?
  Fal. Very ill-fauouredly M[aster]. Broome

   Ford. How so sir, did she change her determination?
  Fal. No (M[aster]. Broome) but the peaking Curnuto her husband
(M[aster]. Broome) dwelling in a continual larum of ielousie,
coms me in the instant of our encounter, after we had
embrast, kist, protested, & (as it were) spoke the prologue
of our Comedy: and at his heeles, a rabble of his companions,
thither prouoked and instigated by his distemper,
and (forsooth) to serch his house for his wiues Loue

   Ford. What? While you were there?
  Fal. While I was there

   For. And did he search for you, & could not find you?
  Fal. You shall heare. As good lucke would haue it,
comes in one Mist[ris]. Page, giues intelligence of Fords approch:
and in her inuention, and Fords wiues distraction,
they conuey'd me into a bucke-basket

   Ford. A Buck-basket?
  Fal. Yes: a Buck-basket: ram'd mee in with foule
Shirts and Smockes, Socks, foule Stockings, greasie
Napkins, that (Master Broome) there was the rankest
compound of villanous smell, that euer offended nostrill

   Ford. And how long lay you there?
  Fal. Nay, you shall heare (Master Broome) what I
haue sufferd, to bring this woman to euill, for your
good: Being thus cram'd in the Basket, a couple of
Fords knaues, his Hindes, were cald forth by their Mistris,
to carry mee in the name of foule Cloathes to
Datchet-lane: they tooke me on their shoulders: met
the iealous knaue their Master in the doore; who
ask'd them once or twice what they had in their Basket?
I quak'd for feare least the Lunatique Knaue
would haue search'd it: but Fate (ordaining he should
be a Cuckold) held his hand: well, on went hee, for
a search, and away went I for foule Cloathes: But
marke the sequell (Master Broome) I suffered the pangs
of three seuerall deaths: First, an intollerable fright,
to be detected with a iealious rotten Bell-weather:
Next to be compass'd like a good Bilbo in the circumference
of a Pecke, hilt to point, heele to head. And
then to be stopt in like a strong distillation with stinking
Cloathes, that fretted in their owne grease:
thinke of that, a man of my Kidney; thinke of that,
that am as subiect to heate as butter; a man of continuall
dissolution, and thaw: it was a miracle to scape
suffocation. And in the height of this Bath (when I
was more then halfe stew'd in grease (like a Dutch-dish)
to be throwne into the Thames, and
coold, glowing-hot, in that serge like a Horse-shoo;
thinke of that; hissing hot: thinke of that (Master
Broome.)
  Ford. In good sadnesse Sir, I am sorry, that for my sake
you haue sufferd all this.
My suite then is desperate: You'll vndertake her no
more?
  Fal. Master Broome: I will be throwne into Etna,
as I haue beene into Thames, ere I will leaue her thus;
her Husband is this morning gone a Birding: I
haue receiued from her another ambassie of meeting:
'twixt eight and nine is the houre (Master
Broome.)
  Ford. 'Tis past eight already Sir

   Fal. Is it? I will then addresse mee to my appointment:
Come to mee at your conuenient leisure, and
you shall know how I speede: and the conclusion
shall be crowned with your enioying her: adiew: you
shall haue her (Master Broome) Master Broome, you shall
cuckold Ford

   Ford. Hum: ha? Is this a vision? Is this a dreame?
doe I sleepe? Master Ford awake, awake Master Ford:
ther's a hole made in your best coate (Master Ford:) this
'tis to be married; this 'tis to haue Lynnen, and Buckbaskets:
Well, I will proclaime my selfe what I am:
I will now take the Leacher: hee is at my house: hee
cannot scape me: 'tis impossible hee should: hee cannot
creepe into a halfe-penny purse, nor into a PepperBoxe:
But least the Diuell that guides him, should
aide him, I will search impossible places: though
what I am, I cannot auoide; yet to be what I would
not, shall not make me tame: If I haue hornes, to make
one mad, let the prouerbe goe with me, Ile be hornemad.

Exeunt.


Actus Quartus. Scoena Prima.

Enter Mistris Page, Quickly, William, Euans.

  Mist.Pag. Is he at M[aster]. Fords already think'st thou?
  Qui. Sure he is by this; or will be presently; but
truely he is very couragious mad, about his throwing
into the water. Mistris Ford desires you to come sodainely

   Mist.Pag. Ile be with her by and by: Ile but bring
my yong-man here to Schoole: looke where his Master
comes; 'tis a playing day I see: how now Sir Hugh, no
Schoole to day?
  Eua. No: Master Slender is let the Boyes leaue to play

   Qui 'Blessing of his heart

   Mist.Pag. Sir Hugh, my husband saies my sonne profits
nothing in the world at his Booke: I pray you aske
him some questions in his Accidence

   Eu. Come hither William; hold vp your head; come

   Mist.Pag. Come-on Sirha; hold vp your head; answere
your Master, be not afraid

   Eua. William, how many Numbers is in Nownes?
  Will. Two

   Qui. Truely, I thought there had bin one Number
more, because they say od's-Nownes

   Eua. Peace, your tatlings. What is (Faire) William?
  Will. Pulcher

   Qu. Powlcats? there are fairer things then Powlcats,
sure

   Eua. You are a very simplicity o'man: I pray you
peace. What is (Lapis) William?
  Will. A Stone

   Eua. And what is a Stone (William?)
  Will. A Peeble

   Eua. No; it is Lapis: I pray you remember in your
praine

   Will. Lapis

   Eua. That is a good William: what is he (William) that
do's lend Articles

   Will. Articles are borrowed of the Pronoune; and be
thus declined. Singulariter nominatiuo hic, haec, hoc

   Eua. Nominatiuo hig, hag, hog: pray you marke: genitiuo
huius: Well: what is your Accusatiue-case?
  Will. Accusatiuo hinc

   Eua. I pray you haue your remembrance (childe) Accusatiuo
hing, hang, hog

   Qu. Hang-hog, is latten for Bacon, I warrant you

   Eua. Leaue your prables (o'man) What is the Focatiue
case (William?)
  Will. O, Vocatiuo, O

   Eua. Remember William, Focatiue, is caret

   Qu. And that's a good roote

   Eua. O'man, forbeare

   Mist.Pag. Peace

   Eua. What is your Genitiue case plurall (William?)
  Will. Genitiue case?
  Eua. I

   Will. Genitiue horum, harum, horum

   Qu. 'Vengeance of Ginyes case; fie on her; neuer
name her (childe) if she be a whore

   Eua. For shame o'man

   Qu. You doe ill to teach the childe such words: hee
teaches him to hic, and to hac; which they'll doe fast
enough of themselues, and to call horum; fie vpon you

   Euans. O'man, art thou Lunatics? Hast thou no vnderstandings
for thy Cases, & the numbers of the Genders?
Thou art as foolish Christian creatures, as I would
desires

   Mi.Page. Pre'thee hold thy peace

   Eu. Shew me now (William) some declensions of your
Pronounes

   Will. Forsooth, I haue forgot

   Eu. It is Qui, que, quod; if you forget your Quies,
your Ques, and your Quods, you must be preeches: Goe
your waies and play, go

   M.Pag. He is a better scholler then I thought he was

   Eu. He is a good sprag-memory: Farewel Mis[tris]. Page

   Mis.Page. Adieu good Sir Hugh:
Get you home boy, Come we stay too long.

Exeunt.


Scena Secunda.

Enter Falstoffe, Mist.Ford, Mist.Page, Seruants, Ford, Page, Caius,
Euans,
Shallow.

  Fal. Mi[stris]. Ford, Your sorrow hath eaten vp my sufferance;
I see you are obsequious in your loue, and I professe
requitall to a haires bredth, not onely Mist[ris]. Ford,
in the simple office of loue, but in all the accustrement,
complement, and ceremony of it: But are you sure of
your husband now?
  Mis.Ford. Hee's a birding (sweet Sir Iohn.)
  Mis.Page. What hoa, gossip Ford: what hoa

   Mis.Ford. Step into th' chamber, Sir Iohn

   Mis.Page. How now (sweete heart) whose at home
besides your selfe?
  Mis.Ford. Why none but mine owne people

   Mis.Page. Indeed?
  Mis.Ford. No certainly: Speake louder

   Mist.Pag. Truly, I am so glad you haue no body here

   Mist.Ford. Why?
  Mis.Page. Why woman, your husband is in his olde
lines againe: he so takes on yonder with my husband, so
railes against all married mankinde; so curses all Eues
daughters, of what complexion soeuer; and so buffettes
himselfe on the for-head: crying peere-out, peere-out,
that any madnesse I euer yet beheld, seem'd but tamenesse,
ciuility, and patience to this his distemper he is in
now: I am glad the fat Knight is not heere

   Mist.Ford. Why, do's he talke of him?
  Mist.Page. Of none but him, and sweares he was caried
out the last time hee search'd for him, in a Basket:
Protests to my husband he is now heere, & hath drawne
him and the rest of their company from their sport, to
make another experiment of his suspition: But I am glad
the Knight is not heere; now he shall see his owne foolerie

   Mist.Ford. How neere is he Mistris Page?
  Mist.Pag. Hard by, at street end; he wil be here anon

   Mist.Ford. I am vndone, the Knight is heere

   Mist.Page. Why then you are vtterly sham'd, & hee's
but a dead man. What a woman are you? Away with
him, away with him: Better shame, then murther

   Mist.Ford. Which way should he go? How should I
bestow him? Shall I put him into the basket againe?
  Fal. No, Ile come no more i'th Basket:
May I not go out ere he come?
  Mist.Page. Alas: three of Mr. Fords brothers watch
the doore with Pistols, that none shall issue out: otherwise
you might slip away ere hee came: But what make
you heere?
  Fal. What shall I do? Ile creepe vp into the chimney

   Mist.Ford. There they alwaies vse to discharge their
Birding-peeces: creepe into the Kill-hole

   Fal. Where is it?
  Mist.Ford. He will seeke there on my word: Neyther
Presse, Coffer, Chest, Trunke, Well, Vault, but he hath
an abstract for the remembrance of such places, and goes
to them by his Note: There is no hiding you in the
house

   Fal. Ile go out then

   Mist.Ford. If you goe out in your owne semblance,
you die Sir Iohn, vnlesse you go out disguis'd

   Mist.Ford. How might we disguise him?
  Mist.Page. Alas the day I know not, there is no womans
gowne bigge enough for him: otherwise he might
put on a hat, a muffler, and a kerchiefe, and so escape

   Fal. Good hearts, deuise something: any extremitie,
rather then a mischiefe

   Mist.Ford. My Maids Aunt the fat woman of Brainford,
has a gowne aboue

   Mist.Page. On my word it will serue him: shee's as
big as he is: and there's her thrum'd hat, and her muffler
too: run vp Sir Iohn

   Mist.Ford. Go, go, sweet Sir Iohn: Mistris Page and
I will looke some linnen for your head

   Mist.Page. Quicke, quicke, wee'le come dresse you
straight: put on the gowne the while

   Mist.Ford. I would my husband would meete him
in this shape: he cannot abide the old woman of Brainford;
he sweares she's a witch, forbad her my house, and
hath threatned to beate her

   Mist.Page. Heauen guide him to thy husbands cudgell:
and the diuell guide his cudgell afterwards

   Mist.Ford. But is my husband comming?
  Mist.Page. I in good sadnesse is he, and talkes of the
basket too, howsoeuer he hath had intelligence

   Mist.Ford. Wee'l try that: for Ile appoint my men to
carry the basket againe, to meete him at the doore with
it, as they did last time

   Mist.Page. Nay, but hee'l be heere presently: let's go
dresse him like the witch of Brainford

   Mist.Ford. Ile first direct my men, what they
shall doe with the basket: Goe vp, Ile bring linnen for
him straight

   Mist.Page. Hang him dishonest Varlet,
We cannot misuse enough:
We'll leaue a proofe by that which we will doo,
Wiues may be merry, and yet honest too:
We do not acte that often, iest, and laugh,
'Tis old, but true, Still Swine eats all the draugh

   Mist.Ford. Go Sirs, take the basket againe on your
shoulders: your Master is hard at doore: if hee bid you
set it downe, obey him: quickly, dispatch

   1 Ser. Come, come, take it vp

   2 Ser. Pray heauen it be not full of Knight againe

   1 Ser. I hope not, I had liefe as beare so much lead

   Ford. I, but if it proue true (Mr. Page) haue you any
way then to vnfoole me againe. Set downe the basket
villaine: some body call my wife: Youth in a basket:
Oh you Panderly Rascals, there's a knot: a gin, a packe,
a conspiracie against me: Now shall the diuel be sham'd.
What wife I say: Come, come forth: behold what honest
cloathes you send forth to bleaching

   Page. Why, this passes M[aster]. Ford: you are not to goe
loose any longer, you must be pinnion'd

   Euans. Why, this is Lunaticks: this is madde, as a
mad dogge

   Shall. Indeed M[aster]. Ford, this is not well indeed

   Ford. So say I too Sir, come hither Mistris Ford, Mistris
Ford, the honest woman, the modest wife, the vertuous
creature, that hath the iealious foole to her husband:
I suspect without cause (Mistris) do I?
  Mist.Ford. Heauen be my witnesse you doe, if you
suspect me in any dishonesty

   Ford. Well said Brazon-face, hold it out: Come forth
sirrah

   Page. This passes

   Mist.Ford. Are you not asham'd, let the cloths alone

   Ford. I shall finde you anon

   Eua. 'Tis vnreasonable; will you take vp your wiues
cloathes? Come, away

   Ford. Empty the basket I say

   M.Ford. Why man, why?
  Ford. Master Page, as I am a man, there was one conuay'd
out of my house yesterday in this basket: why
may not he be there againe, in my house I am sure he is:
my Intelligence is true, my iealousie is reasonable, pluck
me out all the linnen

   Mist.Ford. If you find a man there, he shall dye a Fleas
death

   Page. Heer's no man

   Shal. By my fidelity this is not well Mr. Ford: This
wrongs you

   Euans. Mr Ford, you must pray, and not follow the
imaginations of your owne heart: this is iealousies

   Ford. Well, hee's not heere I seeke for

   Page. No, nor no where else but in your braine

   Ford. Helpe to search my house this one time: if I find
not what I seeke, shew no colour for my extremity: Let
me for euer be your Table-sport: Let them say of me, as
iealous as Ford, that search'd a hollow Wall-nut for his
wiues Lemman. Satisfie me once more, once more serch
with me

   M.Ford. What hoa (Mistris Page,) come you and
the old woman downe: my husband will come into the
Chamber

   Ford. Old woman? what old womans that?
  M.Ford. Why it is my maids Aunt of Brainford

   Ford. A witch, a Queane, an olde couzening queane:
Haue I not forbid her my house. She comes of errands
do's she? We are simple men, wee doe not know what's
brought to passe vnder the profession of Fortune-telling.
She workes by Charmes, by Spels, by th' Figure, & such
dawbry as this is, beyond our Element: wee know nothing.
Come downe you Witch, you Hagge you, come
downe I say

   Mist.Ford. Nay, good sweet husband, good Gentlemen,
let him strike the old woman

   Mist.Page. Come mother Prat, Come giue me your
hand

   Ford. Ile Prat-her: Out of my doore, you Witch,
you Ragge, you Baggage, you Poulcat, you Runnion,
out, out: Ile coniure you, Ile fortune-tell you

   Mist.Page. Are you not asham'd?
I thinke you haue kill'd the poore woman

   Mist.Ford. Nay he will do it, 'tis a goodly credite
for you

   Ford. Hang her witch

   Eua. By yea, and no, I thinke the o'man is a witch indeede:
I like not when a o'man has a great peard; I spie
a great peard vnder his muffler

   Ford. Will you follow Gentlemen, I beseech you follow:
see but the issue of my iealousie: If I cry out thus
vpon no traile, neuer trust me when I open againe

   Page. Let's obey his humour a little further:
Come Gentlemen

   Mist.Page. Trust me he beate him most pittifully

   Mist.Ford. Nay by th' Masse that he did not: he beate
him most vnpittifully, me thought

   Mist.Page. Ile haue the cudgell hallow'd, and hung
ore the Altar, it hath done meritorious seruice

   Mist.Ford. What thinke you? May we with the warrant
of woman-hood, and the witnesse of a good conscience,
pursue him with any further reuenge?
  M.Page. The spirit of wantonnesse is sure scar'd out
of him, if the diuell haue him not in fee-simple, with
fine and recouery, he will neuer (I thinke) in the way of
waste, attempt vs againe

   Mist.Ford. Shall we tell our husbands how wee haue
seru'd him?
  Mist.Page. Yes, by all meanes: if it be but to scrape
the figures out of your husbands braines: if they can find
in their hearts, the poore vnuertuous fat Knight shall be
any further afflicted, wee two will still bee the ministers

   Mist.Ford. Ile warrant, they'l haue him publiquely
sham'd, and me thinkes there would be no period to the
iest, should he not be publikely sham'd

   Mist.Page. Come, to the Forge with it, then shape it:
I would not haue things coole.

Exeunt.

Scena Tertia.

Enter Host and Bardolfe.

  Bar. Sir, the Germane desires to haue three of your
horses: the Duke himselfe will be to morrow at Court,
and they are going to meet him

   Host. What Duke should that be comes so secretly?
I heare not of him in the Court: let mee speake with the
Gentlemen, they speake English?
  Bar. I Sir? Ile call him to you

   Host. They shall haue my horses, but Ile make them
pay: Ile sauce them, they haue had my houses a week at
commaund: I haue turn'd away my other guests, they
must come off, Ile sawce them, come.

Exeunt.

Scena Quarta.

Enter Page, Ford, Mistris Page, Mistris Ford, and Euans.

  Eua. 'Tis one of the best discretions of a o'man as euer
I did looke vpon

   Page. And did he send you both these Letters at an
instant?
  Mist.Page. Within a quarter of an houre

   Ford. Pardon me (wife) henceforth do what y wilt:
I rather will suspect the Sunne with gold,
Then thee with wantonnes: Now doth thy honor stand
(In him that was of late an Heretike)
As firme as faith

   Page. 'Tis well, 'tis well, no more:
Be not as extreme in submission, as in offence,
But let our plot go forward: Let our wiues
Yet once againe (to make vs publike sport)
Appoint a meeting with this old fat-fellow,
Where we may take him, and disgrace him for it

   Ford. There is no better way then that they spoke of

   Page. How? to send him word they'll meete him in
the Parke at midnight? Fie, fie, he'll neuer come

   Eu. You say he has bin throwne in the Riuers: and
has bin greeuously peaten, as an old o'man: me-thinkes
there should be terrors in him, that he should not come:
Me-thinkes his flesh is punish'd, hee shall haue no desires

   Page. So thinke I too

   M.Ford. Deuise but how you'l vse him whe[n] he comes,
And let vs two deuise to bring him thether

   Mis.Page. There is an old tale goes, that Herne the
Hunter (sometime a keeper heere in Windsor Forrest)
Doth all the winter time, at still midnight
Walke round about an Oake, with great rag'd-hornes,
And there he blasts the tree, and takes the cattle,
And make milch-kine yeeld blood, and shakes a chaine
In a most hideous and dreadfull manner.
You haue heard of such a Spirit, and well you know
The superstitious idle-headed-Eld
Receiu'd, and did deliuer to our age
This tale of Herne the Hunter, for a truth

   Page. Why yet there want not many that do feare
In deepe of night to walke by this Hernes Oake:
But what of this?
  Mist.Ford. Marry this is our deuise,
That Falstaffe at that Oake shall meete with vs

   Page. Well, let it not be doubted but he'll come,
And in this shape, when you haue brought him thether,
What shall be done with him? What is your plot?
  Mist.Pa. That likewise haue we thoght vpon: & thus:
Nan Page (my daughter) and my little sonne,
And three or foure more of their growth, wee'l dresse
Like Vrchins, Ouphes, and Fairies, greene and white,
With rounds of waxen Tapers on their heads,
And rattles in their hands; vpon a sodaine,
As Falstaffe, she, and I, are newly met,
Let them from forth a saw-pit rush at once
With some diffused song: Vpon their sight
We two, in great amazednesse will flye:
Then let them all encircle him about,
And Fairy-like to pinch the vncleane Knight;
And aske him why that houre of Fairy Reuell,
In their so sacred pathes, he dares to tread
In shape prophane

   Ford. And till he tell the truth,
Let the supposed Fairies pinch him, sound,
And burne him with their Tapers

   Mist.Page. The truth being knowne,
We'll all present our selues; dis-horne the spirit,
And mocke him home to Windsor

   Ford. The children must
Be practis'd well to this, or they'll neu'r doo't

   Eua. I will teach the children their behauiours: and I
will be like a Iacke-an-Apes also, to burne the Knight
with my Taber

   Ford. That will be excellent,
Ile go buy them vizards

   Mist.Page. My Nan shall be the Queene of all the
Fairies, finely attired in a robe of white

   Page. That silke will I go buy, and in that time
Shall M[aster]. Slender steale my Nan away,
And marry her at Eaton: go, send to Falstaffe straight

   Ford. Nay, Ile to him againe in name of Broome,
Hee'l tell me all his purpose: sure hee'l come

   Mist.Page. Feare not you that: Go get vs properties
And tricking for our Fayries

   Euans. Let vs about it,
It is admirable pleasures, and ferry honest knaueries

   Mis.Page. Go Mist[ris]. Ford,
Send quickly to Sir Iohn, to know his minde:
Ile to the Doctor, he hath my good will,
And none but he to marry with Nan Page:
That Slender (though well landed) is an Ideot:
And he, my husband best of all affects:
The Doctor is well monied, and his friends
Potent at Court: he, none but he shall haue her,
Though twenty thousand worthier come to craue her.

Scena Quinta.

Enter Host, Simple, Falstaffe, Bardolfe, Euans, Caius, Quickly.

  Host. What wouldst thou haue? (Boore) what? (thick
skin) speake, breathe, discusse: breefe, short, quicke,
snap

   Simp. Marry Sir, I come to speake with Sir Iohn Falstaffe
from M[aster]. Slender

   Host. There's his Chamber, his House, his Castle,
his standing-bed and truckle-bed: 'tis painted about
with the story of the Prodigall, fresh and new: go, knock
and call: hee'l speake like an Anthropophaginian vnto
thee: Knocke I say

   Simp. There's an olde woman, a fat woman gone vp
into his chamber: Ile be so bold as stay Sir till she come
downe: I come to speake with her indeed

   Host. Ha? A fat woman? The Knight may be robb'd:
Ile call. Bully-Knight, Bully Sir Iohn: speake from thy
Lungs Military: Art thou there? It is thine Host, thine
Ephesian cals

   Fal. How now, mine Host?
  Host. Here's a Bohemian-Tartar taries the comming
downe of thy fat-woman: Let her descend (Bully) let
her descend: my Chambers are honourable: Fie, priuacy?
Fie

   Fal. There was (mine Host) an old-fat-woman euen
now with me, but she's gone

   Simp. Pray you Sir, was't not the Wise-woman of
Brainford?
  Fal. I marry was it (Mussel-shell) what would you
with her?
  Simp. My Master (Sir) my master Slender, sent to her
seeing her go thorough the streets, to know (Sir) whether
one Nim (Sir) that beguil'd him of a chaine, had the
chaine, or no

   Fal. I spake with the old woman about it

   Sim. And what sayes she, I pray Sir?
  Fal. Marry shee sayes, that the very same man that
beguil'd Master Slender of his Chaine, cozon'd him of it

   Simp. I would I could haue spoken with the Woman
her selfe, I had other things to haue spoken with her
too, from him

   Fal. What are they? let vs know

   Host. I: come: quicke

   Fal. I may not conceale them (Sir.)
  Host. Conceale them, or thou di'st

   Sim. Why sir, they were nothing but about Mistris
Anne Page, to know if it were my Masters fortune to
haue her, or no

   Fal. 'Tis, 'tis his fortune

   Sim. What Sir?
  Fal. To haue her, or no: goe; say the woman told
me so

   Sim. May I be bold to say so Sir?
  Fal. I Sir: like who more bold

   Sim. I thanke your worship: I shall make my Master
glad with these tydings

   Host. Thou art clearkly: thou art clearkly (Sir Iohn)
was there a wise woman with thee?
  Fal. I that there was (mine Host) one that hath taught
me more wit, then euer I learn'd before in my life: and
I paid nothing for it neither, but was paid for my learning

   Bar. Out alas (Sir) cozonage: meere cozonage

   Host. Where be my horses? speake well of them varletto

   Bar. Run away with the cozoners: for so soone as
I came beyond Eaton, they threw me off, from behinde
one of them, in a slough of myre; and set spurres, and
away; like three Germane-diuels; three Doctor Faustasses

   Host. They are gone but to meete the Duke (villaine)
doe not say they be fled: Germanes are honest men

   Euan. Where is mine Host?
  Host. What is the matter Sir?
  Euan. Haue a care of your entertainments: there is a
friend of mine come to Towne, tels mee there is three
Cozen-Iermans, that has cozend all the Hosts of Reading,
of Maidenhead; of Cole-brooke, of horses and money: I
tell you for good will (looke you) you are wise, and full
of gibes, and vlouting-stocks: and 'tis not conuenient
you should be cozoned. Fare you well

   Cai. Ver' is mine Host de Iarteere?
  Host. Here (Master Doctor) in perplexitie, and doubtfull
delemma

   Cai. I cannot tell vat is dat: but it is tell-a-me, dat
you make grand preparation for a Duke de Iamanie: by
my trot: der is no Duke that the Court is know, to
come: I tell you for good will: adieu

   Host. Huy and cry, (villaine) goe: assist me Knight, I
am vndone: fly, run: huy, and cry (villaine) I am vndone

   Fal. I would all the world might be cozond, for I
haue beene cozond and beaten too: if it should come
to the eare of the Court, how I haue beene transformed;
and how my transformation hath beene washd, and
cudgeld, they would melt mee out of my fat drop by
drop, and liquor Fishermens-boots with me: I warrant
they would whip me with their fine wits, till I were as
crest-falne as a dride-peare: I neuer prosper'd, since I
forswore my selfe at Primero: well, if my winde were
but long enough; I would repent: Now? Whence come
you?
  Qui. From the two parties forsooth

   Fal. The Diuell take one partie, and his Dam the
other: and so they shall be both bestowed; I haue suffer'd
more for their sakes; more then the villanous inconstancy
of mans disposition is able to beare

   Qui. And haue not they suffer'd? Yes, I warrant; speciously
one of them; Mistris Ford (good heart) is beaten
blacke and blew, that you cannot see a white spot about
her

   Fal. What tell'st thou mee of blacke, and blew? I
was beaten my selfe into all the colours of the Rainebow:
and I was like to be apprehended for the Witch
of Braineford, but that my admirable dexteritie of wit,
my counterfeiting the action of an old woman deliuer'd
me, the knaue Constable had set me ith' Stocks, ith' common
Stocks, for a Witch

   Qu, Sir: let me speake with you in your Chamber,
you shall heare how things goe, and (I warrant) to your
content: here is a Letter will say somewhat: (good-hearts)
what adoe here is to bring you together? Sure,
one of you do's not serue heauen well, that you are so
cross'd

   Fal. Come vp into my Chamber.

Exeunt.


Scena Sexta.

Enter Fenton, Host.

  Host. Master Fenton, talke not to mee, my minde is
heauy: I will giue ouer all

   Fen. Yet heare me speake: assist me in my purpose,
And (as I am a gentleman) ile giue thee
A hundred pound in gold, more then your losse

   Host. I will heare you (Master Fenton) and I will (at
the least) keepe your counsell

   Fen. From time to time, I haue acquainted you
With the deare loue I beare to faire Anne Page,
Who, mutually, hath answer'd my affection,
(So farre forth, as her selfe might be her chooser)
Euen to my wish; I haue a letter from her
Of such contents, as you will wonder at;
The mirth whereof, so larded with my matter,
That neither (singly) can be manifested
Without the shew of both: fat Falstaffe
Hath a great Scene; the image of the iest
Ile show you here at large (harke good mine Host:)
To night at Hernes-Oke, iust 'twixt twelue and one,
Must my sweet Nan present the Faerie-Queene:
The purpose why, is here: in which disguise
While other Iests are something ranke on foote,
Her father hath commanded her to slip
Away with Slender, and with him, at Eaton
Immediately to Marry: She hath consented: Now Sir,
Her Mother, (euen strong against that match
And firme for Doctor Caius) hath appointed
That he shall likewise shuffle her away,
While other sports are tasking of their mindes,
And at the Deanry, where a Priest attends
Strait marry her: to this her Mothers plot
She seemingly obedient) likewise hath
Made promise to the Doctor: Now, thus it rests,
Her Father meanes she shall be all in white;
And in that habit, when Slender sees his time
To take her by the hand, and bid her goe,
She shall goe with him: her Mother hath intended
(The better to deuote her to the Doctor;
For they must all be mask'd, and vizarded)
That quaint in greene, she shall be loose en-roab'd,
With Ribonds-pendant, flaring 'bout her head;
And when the Doctor spies his vantage ripe,
To pinch her by the hand, and on that token,
The maid hath giuen consent to go with him

   Host. Which meanes she to deceiue? Father, or Mother

   Fen. Both (my good Host) to go along with me:
And heere it rests, that you'l procure the Vicar
To stay for me at Church, 'twixt twelue, and one,
And in the lawfull name of marrying,
To giue our hearts vnited ceremony

   Host. Well, husband your deuice; Ile to the Vicar,
Bring you the Maid, you shall not lacke a Priest

   Fen. So shall I euermore be bound to thee;
Besides, Ile make a present recompence.

Exeunt.

Actus Quintus. Scoena Prima.

Enter Falstoffe, Quickly, and Ford.

  Fal. Pre'thee no more pratling: go, Ile hold, this is
the third time: I hope good lucke lies in odde numbers:
Away, go, they say there is Diuinity in odde Numbers,
either in natiuity, chance, or death: away

   Qui. Ile prouide you a chaine, and Ile do what I can
to get you a paire of hornes

   Fall. Away I say, time weares, hold vp your head &
mince. How now M[aster]. Broome? Master Broome, the matter
will be knowne to night, or neuer. Bee you in the
Parke about midnight, at Hernes-Oake, and you shall
see wonders

   Ford. Went you not to her yesterday (Sir) as you told
me you had appointed?
  Fal. I went to her (Master Broome) as you see, like a
poore-old-man, but I came from her (Master Broome)
like a poore-old-woman; that same knaue (Ford hir husband)
hath the finest mad diuell of iealousie in him (Master
Broome) that euer gouern'd Frensie. I will tell you,
he beate me greeuously, in the shape of a woman: (for in
the shape of Man (Master Broome) I feare not Goliath
with a Weauers beame, because I know also, life is a
Shuttle) I am in hast, go along with mee, Ile tell you all
(Master Broome:) since I pluckt Geese, plaide Trewant,
and whipt Top, I knew not what 'twas to be beaten, till
lately. Follow mee, Ile tell you strange things of this
knaue Ford, on whom to night I will be reuenged, and I
will deliuer his wife into your hand. Follow, straunge
things in hand (M[aster]. Broome) follow.

Exeunt.


Scena Secunda.

Enter Page, Shallow, Slender.

  Page. Come, come: wee'll couch i'th Castle-ditch,
till we see the light of our Fairies. Remember son Slender,
my
  Slen. I forsooth, I haue spoke with her, & we haue
a nay-word, how to know one another. I come to her
in white, and cry Mum; she cries Budget, and by that
we know one another

   Shal. That's good too: But what needes either your
Mum, or her Budget? The white will decipher her well
enough. It hath strooke ten a' clocke

   Page. The night is darke, Light and Spirits will become
it wel: Heauen prosper our sport. No man means
euill but the deuill, and we shal know him by his hornes.
Lets away: follow me.

Exeunt.


Scena Tertia.

Enter Mist.Page, Mist.Ford, Caius.

  Mist.Page. Mr Doctor, my daughter is in green, when
you see your time, take her by the hand, away with her
to the Deanerie, and dispatch it quickly: go before into
the Parke: we two must go together

   Cai. I know vat I haue to do, adieu

   Mist.Page. Fare you well (Sir:) my husband will not
reioyce so much at the abuse of Falstaffe, as he will chafe
at the Doctors marrying my daughter: But 'tis no matter;
better a little chiding, then a great deale of heartbreake

   Mist.Ford. Where is Nan now? and her troop of Fairies?
and the Welch-deuill Herne?
  Mist.Page. They are all couch'd in a pit hard by Hernes
Oake, with obscur'd Lights; which at the very instant
of Falstaffes and our meeting, they will at once display to
the night

   Mist.Ford. That cannot choose but amaze him

   Mist.Page. If he be not amaz'd he will be mock'd: If
he be amaz'd, he will euery way be mock'd

   Mist.Ford. Wee'll betray him finely

   Mist.Page. Against such Lewdsters, and their lechery,
Those that betray them, do no treachery

   Mist.Ford. The houre drawes-on: to the Oake, to the
Oake.

Exeunt.


Scena Quarta.

Enter Euans and Fairies.

  Euans. Trib, trib Fairies: Come, and remember your
parts: be pold (I pray you) follow me into the pit, and
when I giue the watch-'ords, do as I pid you: Come,
come, trib, trib.

Exeunt.

Scena Quinta.

Enter Falstaffe, Mistris Page, Mistris Ford, Euans, Anne Page,
Fairies,
Page, Ford, Quickly, Slender, Fenton, Caius, Pistoll.

  Fal. The Windsor-bell hath stroke twelue: the Minute
drawes-on: Now the hot-bloodied-Gods assist me:
Remember Ioue, thou was't a Bull for thy Europa, Loue
set on thy hornes. O powerfull Loue, that in some respects
makes a Beast a Man: in som other, a Man a beast.
You were also (Iupiter) a Swan, for the loue of Leda: O
omnipotent Loue, how nere the God drew to the complexion
of a Goose: a fault done first in the forme of a
beast, (O Ioue, a beastly fault:) and then another fault,
in the semblance of a Fowle, thinke on't (Ioue) a fowle-fault.
When Gods haue hot backes, what shall poore
men do? For me, I am heere a Windsor Stagge, and the
fattest (I thinke) i'th Forrest. Send me a coole rut-time
(Ioue) or who can blame me to pisse my Tallow? Who
comes heere? my Doe?
  M.Ford. Sir Iohn? Art thou there (my Deere?)
My male-Deere?
  Fal. My Doe, with the blacke Scut? Let the skie
raine Potatoes: let it thunder, to the tune of Greenesleeues,
haile-kissing Comfits, and snow Eringoes: Let
there come a tempest of prouocation, I will shelter mee
heere

   M.Ford. Mistris Page is come with me (sweet hart.)
  Fal. Diuide me like a brib'd-Bucke, each a Haunch:
I will keepe my sides to my selfe, my shoulders for the
fellow of this walke; and my hornes I bequeath your
husbands. Am I a Woodman, ha? Speake I like Herne
the Hunter? Why, now is Cupid a child of conscience,
he makes restitution. As I am a true spirit, welcome

   M.Page. Alas, what noise?
  M.Ford. Heauen forgiue our sinnes

   Fal. What should this be?
  M.Ford. M.Page. Away, away

   Fal. I thinke the diuell wil not haue me damn'd,
Least the oyle that's in me should set hell on fire;
He would neuer else crosse me thus.

Enter Fairies.

  Qui. Fairies blacke, gray, greene, and white,
You Moone-shine reuellers, and shades of night.
You Orphan heires of fixed destiny,
Attend your office, and your quality.
Crier Hob-goblyn, make the Fairy Oyes

   Pist. Elues, list your names: Silence you aiery toyes.
Cricket, to Windsor-chimnies shalt thou leape;
Where fires thou find'st vnrak'd, and hearths vnswept,
There pinch the Maids as blew as Bill-berry,
Our radiant Queene, hates Sluts, and Sluttery

   Fal. They are Fairies, he that speaks to them shall die,
Ile winke, and couch: No man their workes must eie

   Eu. Wher's Bede? Go you, and where you find a maid
That ere she sleepe has thrice her prayers said,
Raise vp the Organs of her fantasie,
Sleepe she as sound as carelesse infancie,
But those as sleepe, and thinke not on their sins,
Pinch them armes, legs, backes, shoulders, sides, & shins

   Qu. About, about:
Search Windsor Castle (Elues) within, and out.
Strew good lucke (Ouphes) on euery sacred roome,
That it may stand till the perpetuall doome,
In state as wholsome, as in state 'tis fit,
Worthy the Owner, and the Owner it.
The seuerall Chaires of Order, looke you scowre
With iuyce of Balme; and euery precious flowre,
Each faire Instalment, Coate, and seu'rall Crest,
With loyall Blazon, euermore be blest.
And Nightly-meadow-Fairies, looke you sing
Like to the Garters-Compasse, in a ring
Th' expressure that it beares: Greene let it be,
More fertile-fresh then all the Field to see:
And, Hony Soit Qui Maly-Pence, write
In Emrold-tuffes, Flowres purple, blew, and white,
Like Saphire-pearle, and rich embroiderie,
Buckled below faire Knight-hoods bending knee;
Fairies vse Flowres for their characterie.
Away, disperse: But till 'tis one a clocke,
Our Dance of Custome, round about the Oke
Of Herne the Hunter, let vs not forget

   Euan. Pray you lock hand in hand: your selues in order set:
And twenty glow-wormes shall our Lanthornes bee
To guide our Measure round about the Tree.
But stay, I smell a man of middle earth

   Fal. Heauens defend me from that Welsh Fairy,
Least he transforme me to a peece of Cheese

   Pist. Vilde worme, thou wast ore-look'd euen in thy
birth

   Qu. With Triall-fire touch me his finger end:
If he be chaste, the flame will backe descend
And turne him to no paine: but if he start,
It is the flesh of a corrupted hart

   Pist. A triall, come

   Eua. Come: will this wood take fire?
  Fal. Oh, oh, oh

   Qui. Corrupt, corrupt, and tainted in desire.
About him (Fairies) sing a scornfull rime,
And as you trip, still pinch him to your time.

The Song.

Fie on sinnefull phantasie: Fie on Lust, and Luxurie:
Lust is but a bloudy fire, kindled with vnchaste desire,
Fed in heart whose flames aspire,
As thoughts do blow them higher and higher.
Pinch him (Fairies) mutually: Pinch him for his villanie.
Pinch him, and burne him, and turne him about,
Till Candles, & Star-light, & Moone-shine be out

   Page. Nay do not flye, I thinke we haue watcht you
now: Will none but Herne the Hunter serue your
turne?
  M.Page. I pray you come, hold vp the iest no higher.
Now (good Sir Iohn) how like you Windsor wiues?
See you these husband? Do not these faire yoakes
Become the Forrest better then the Towne?
  Ford. Now Sir, whose a Cuckold now?
Mr Broome, Falstaffes a Knaue, a Cuckoldly knaue,
Heere are his hornes Master Broome:
And Master Broome, he hath enioyed nothing of Fords,
but his Buck-basket, his cudgell, and twenty pounds of
money, which must be paid to Mr Broome, his horses are
arrested for it, Mr Broome

   M.Ford. Sir Iohn, we haue had ill lucke: wee could
neuer meete: I will neuer take you for my Loue againe,
but I will alwayes count you my Deere

   Fal. I do begin to perceiue that I am made an Asse

   Ford. I, and an Oxe too: both the proofes are extant

   Fal. And these are not Fairies:
I was three or foure times in the thought they were not
Fairies, and yet the guiltinesse of my minde, the sodaine
surprize of my powers, droue the grossenesse of the foppery
into a receiu'd beleefe, in despight of the teeth of
all rime and reason, that they were Fairies. See now
how wit may be made a Iacke-a-Lent, when 'tis vpon ill
imployment

   Euans. Sir Iohn Falstaffe, serue Got, and leaue your
desires, and Fairies will not pinse you

   Ford. Well said Fairy Hugh

   Euans. And leaue you your iealouzies too, I pray
you

   Ford. I will neuer mistrust my wife againe, till thou
art able to woo her in good English

   Fal. Haue I laid my braine in the Sun, and dri'de it,
that it wants matter to preuent so grosse ore-reaching as
this? Am I ridden with a Welch Goate too? Shal I haue
a Coxcombe of Frize? Tis time I were choak'd with a
peece of toasted Cheese

   Eu. Seese is not good to giue putter; your belly is al
putter

   Fal. Seese, and Putter? Haue I liu'd to stand at the
taunt of one that makes Fritters of English? This is enough
to be the decay of lust and late-walking through
the Realme

   Mist.Page. Why Sir Iohn, do you thinke though wee
would haue thrust vertue out of our hearts by the head
and shoulders, and haue giuen our selues without scruple
to hell, that euer the deuill could haue made you our
delight?
  Ford. What, a hodge-pudding? A bag of flax?
  Mist.Page. A puft man?
  Page. Old, cold, wither'd, and of intollerable entrailes?
  Ford. And one that is as slanderous as Sathan?
  Page. And as poore as Iob?
  Ford. And as wicked as his wife?
  Euan. And giuen to Fornications, and to Tauernes,
and Sacke, and Wine, and Metheglins, and to drinkings
and swearings, and starings? Pribles and prables?
  Fal. Well, I am your Theame: you haue the start of
me, I am deiected: I am not able to answer the Welch
Flannell, Ignorance it selfe is a plummet ore me, vse me
as you will

   Ford. Marry Sir, wee'l bring you to Windsor to one
Mr Broome, that you haue cozon'd of money, to whom
you should haue bin a Pander: ouer and aboue that you
haue suffer'd, I thinke, to repay that money will be a biting
affliction

   Page. Yet be cheerefull Knight: thou shalt eat a posset
to night at my house, wher I will desire thee to laugh
at my wife, that now laughes at thee: Tell her Mr Slender
hath married her daughter

   Mist.Page. Doctors doubt that;
If Anne Page be my daughter, she is (by this) Doctour
Caius wife

   Slen. Whoa hoe, hoe, Father Page

   Page. Sonne? How now? How now Sonne,
Haue you dispatch'd?
  Slen. Dispatch'd? Ile make the best in Glostershire
know on't: would I were hang'd la, else

   Page. Of what sonne?
  Slen. I came yonder at Eaton to marry Mistris Anne
Page, and she's a great lubberly boy. If it had not bene
i'th Church, I would haue swing'd him, or hee should
haue swing'd me. If I did not thinke it had beene Anne
Page, would I might neuer stirre, and 'tis a Post-masters
Boy

   Page. Vpon my life then, you tooke the wrong

   Slen. What neede you tell me that? I think so, when
I tooke a Boy for a Girle: If I had bene married to him,
(for all he was in womans apparrell) I would not haue
had him

   Page. Why this is your owne folly,
Did not I tell you how you should know my daughter,
By her garments?
  Slen. I went to her in greene, and cried Mum, and
she cride budget, as Anne and I had appointed, and yet
it was not Anne, but a Post-masters boy

   Mist.Page. Good George be not angry, I knew of
your purpose: turn'd my daughter into white, and indeede
she is now with the Doctor at the Deanrie, and
there married

   Cai. Ver is Mistris Page: by gar I am cozoned, I ha
married oon Garsoon, a boy; oon pesant, by gar. A boy,
it is not An Page, by gar, I am cozened

   M.Page. Why? did you take her in white?
  Cai. I bee gar, and 'tis a boy: be gar, Ile raise all
Windsor

   Ford. This is strange: Who hath got the right Anne?
  Page. My heart misgiues me, here comes Mr Fenton.
How now Mr Fenton?
  Anne. Pardon good father, good my mother pardon
  Page. Now Mistris:
How chance you went not with Mr Slender?
  M.Page. Why went you not with Mr Doctor, maid?
  Fen. You do amaze her: heare the truth of it,
You would haue married her most shamefully,
Where there was no proportion held in loue:
The truth is, she and I (long since contracted)
Are now so sure that nothing can dissolue vs:
Th' offence is holy, that she hath committed,
And this deceit looses the name of craft,
Of disobedience, or vnduteous title,
Since therein she doth euitate and shun
A thousand irreligious cursed houres
Which forced marriage would haue brought vpon her

   Ford. Stand not amaz'd, here is no remedie:
In Loue, the heauens themselues do guide the state,
Money buyes Lands, and wiues are sold by fate

   Fal. I am glad, though you haue tane a special stand
to strike at me, that your Arrow hath glanc'd

   Page. Well, what remedy? Fenton, heauen giue thee
ioy, what cannot be eschew'd, must be embrac'd

   Fal. When night-dogges run, all sorts of Deere are
chac'd

   Mist.Page. Well, I will muse no further: Mr Fenton,
Heauen giue you many, many merry dayes:
Good husband, let vs euery one go home,
And laugh this sport ore by a Countrie fire,
Sir Iohn and all

   Ford. Let it be so (Sir Iohn:)
To Master Broome, you yet shall hold your word,
For he, to night, shall lye with Mistris Ford:

Exeunt.

FINIS. THE Merry Wiues of Windsor.
