***The Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's First Folio***
************The Tragedie of Anthonie, and Cleopatra*************

This is our 3rd edition of most of these plays.  See the index.


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Tragedie of Anthonie, and Cleopatra

by William Shakespeare

July, 2000  [Etext #2268]


***The Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's First Folio***
************The Tragedie of Anthonie, and Cleopatra*************

*****This file should be named 0ws3510.txt or 0ws3510.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 0ws3511.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 0ws3510a.txt


Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it, if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . . .

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g., GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability, cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration, modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





Project Gutenberg's Etext of Shakespeare's The Tragedie of Anthonie, and Cleopatra






Executive Director's Notes:

In addition to the notes below, and so you will *NOT* think all
the spelling errors introduced by the printers of the time have
been corrected, here are the first few lines of Hamlet, as they
are presented herein:

  Barnardo. Who's there?
  Fran. Nay answer me: Stand & vnfold
your selfe

   Bar. Long liue the King

***

As I understand it, the printers often ran out of certain words
or letters they had often packed into a "cliche". . .this is the
original meaning of the term cliche. . .and thus, being unwilling
to unpack the cliches, and thus you will see some substitutions
that look very odd. . .such as the exchanges of u for v, v for u,
above. . .and you may wonder why they did it this way, presuming
Shakespeare did not actually write the play in this manner. . . .

The answer is that they MAY have packed "liue" into a cliche at a
time when they were out of "v"'s. . .possibly having used "vv" in
place of some "w"'s, etc.  This was a common practice of the day,
as print was still quite expensive, and they didn't want to spend
more on a wider selection of characters than they had to.

You will find a lot of these kinds of "errors" in this text, as I
have mentioned in other times and places, many "scholars" have an
extreme attachment to these errors, and many have accorded them a
very high place in the "canon" of Shakespeare.  My father read an
assortment of these made available to him by Cambridge University
in England for several months in a glass room constructed for the
purpose.  To the best of my knowledge he read ALL those available
. . .in great detail. . .and determined from the various changes,
that Shakespeare most likely did not write in nearly as many of a
variety of errors we credit him for, even though he was in/famous
for signing his name with several different spellings.

So, please take this into account when reading the comments below
made by our volunteer who prepared this file:  you may see errors
that are "not" errors. . . .

So. . .with this caveat. . .we have NOT changed the canon errors,
here is the Project Gutenberg Etext of Shakespeare's The Tragedie of Anthonie, and Cleopatra.

Michael S. Hart
Project Gutenberg
Executive Director


***


Scanner's Notes: What this is and isn't.  This was taken from 
a copy of Shakespeare's first folio and it is as close as I can
come in ASCII to the printed text.

The elongated S's have been changed to small s's and the
conjoined ae have been changed to ae.  I have left the spelling,
punctuation, capitalization as close as possible to the
printed text.  I have corrected some spelling mistakes (I have put
together a spelling dictionary devised from the spellings of the
Geneva Bible and Shakespeare's First Folio and have unified
spellings according to this template), typo's and expanded
abbreviations as I have come across them.  Everything within
brackets [] is what I have added.  So if you don't like that
you can delete everything within the brackets if you want a
purer Shakespeare.

Another thing that you should be aware of is that there are textual
differences between various copies of the first folio.  So there may
be differences (other than what I have mentioned above) between
this and other first folio editions.  This is due to the printer's
habit of setting the type and running off a number of copies and
then proofing the printed copy and correcting the type and then
continuing the printing run.  The proof run wasn't thrown away but
incorporated into the printed copies.  This is just the way it is.
The text I have used was a composite of more than 30 different
First Folio editions' best pages.

If you find any scanning errors, out and out typos, punctuation
errors, or if you disagree with my spelling choices please feel
free to email me those errors.  I wish to make this the best
etext possible.  My email address for right now are haradda@aol.com
and davidr@inconnect.com.  I hope that you enjoy this.

David Reed

The Tragedie of Anthonie, and Cleopatra

Actus Primus. Scoena Prima.

Enter Demetrius and Philo.

  Philo. Nay, but this dotage of our Generals
Ore-flowes the measure: those his goodly eyes
That o're the Files and Musters of the Warre,
Haue glow'd like plated Mars:
Now bend, now turne
The Office and Deuotion of their view
Vpon a Tawny Front. His Captaines heart,
Which in the scuffles of great Fights hath burst
The Buckles on his brest, reneages all temper,
And is become the Bellowes and the Fan
To coole a Gypsies Lust.

Flourish. Enter Anthony, Cleopatra, her Ladies, the Traine, with
Eunuchs
fanning her.

Looke where they come:
Take but good note, and you shall see in him
(The triple Pillar of the world) transform'd
Into a Strumpets Foole. Behold and see

   Cleo. If it be Loue indeed, tell me how much

   Ant. There's beggery in the loue that can be reckon'd
  Cleo. Ile set a bourne how farre to be belou'd

   Ant. Then must thou needes finde out new Heauen,
new Earth.
Enter a Messenger.

  Mes. Newes (my good Lord) from Rome

   Ant. Grates me, the summe

   Cleo. Nay heare them Anthony.
Fuluia perchance is angry: Or who knowes,
If the scarse-bearded Caesar haue not sent
His powrefull Mandate to you. Do this, or this;
Take in that Kingdome, and Infranchise that:
Perform't, or else we damne thee

   Ant. How, my Loue?
  Cleo. Perchance? Nay, and most like:
You must not stay heere longer, your dismission
Is come from Caesar, therefore heare it Anthony,
Where's Fuluias Processe? (Caesars I would say) both?
Call in the Messengers: As I am Egypts Queene,
Thou blushest Anthony, and that blood of thine
Is Caesars homager: else so thy cheeke payes shame,
When shrill-tongu'd Fuluia scolds. The Messengers

   Ant. Let Rome in Tyber melt, and the wide Arch
Of the raing'd Empire fall: Heere is my space,
Kingdomes are clay: Our dungie earth alike
Feeds Beast as Man; the Noblenesse of life
Is to do thus: when such a mutuall paire,
And such a twaine can doo't, in which I binde
One paine of punishment, the world to weete
We stand vp Peerelesse

   Cleo. Excellent falshood:
Why did he marry Fuluia, and not loue her?
Ile seeme the Foole I am not. Anthony will be himselfe

   Ant. But stirr'd by Cleopatra.
Now for the loue of Loue, and her soft houres,
Let's not confound the time with Conference harsh;
There's not a minute of our liues should stretch
Without some pleasure now. What sport to night?
  Cleo. Heare the Ambassadors

   Ant. Fye wrangling Queene:
Whom euery thing becomes, to chide, to laugh,
To weepe: who euery passion fully striues
To make it selfe (in Thee) faire, and admir'd.
No Messenger but thine, and all alone, to night
Wee'l wander through the streets, and note
The qualities of people. Come my Queene,
Last night you did desire it. Speake not to vs.

Exeunt. with the Traine.

  Dem. Is Caesar with Anthonius priz'd so slight?
  Philo. Sir, sometimes when he is not Anthony,
He comes too short of that great Property
Which still should go with Anthony

   Dem. I am full sorry, that hee approues the common
Lyar, who thus speakes of him at Rome; but I will hope
of better deeds to morrow. Rest you happy.

Exeunt.

Enter Enobarbus, Lamprius, a Southsayer, Rannius, Lucillius,
Charmian,
Iras, Mardian the Eunuch, and Alexas.

  Char. L[ord]. Alexas, sweet Alexas, most any thing Alexas,
almost most absolute Alexas, where's the Soothsayer
that you prais'd so to'th' Queene? Oh that I knewe this
Husband, which you say, must change his Hornes with
Garlands

   Alex. Soothsayer

   Sooth. Your will?
  Char. Is this the Man? Is't you sir that know things?
  Sooth. In Natures infinite booke of Secrecie, a little I
can read

   Alex. Shew him your hand

   Enob. Bring in the Banket quickly: Wine enough,
Cleopatra's health to drinke

   Char. Good sir, giue me good Fortune

   Sooth. I make not, but foresee

   Char. Pray then, foresee me one

   Sooth. You shall be yet farre fairer then you are

   Char. He meanes in flesh

   Iras. No, you shall paint when you are old

   Char. Wrinkles forbid

   Alex. Vex not his prescience, be attentiue

   Char. Hush

   Sooth. You shall be more belouing, then beloued

   Char. I had rather heate my Liuer with drinking

   Alex. Nay, heare him

   Char. Good now some excellent Fortune: Let mee
be married to three Kings in a forenoone, and Widdow
them all: Let me haue a Childe at fifty, to whom Herode
of Iewry may do Homage. Finde me to marrie me with
Octauius Caesar, and companion me with my Mistris

   Sooth. You shall out-liue the Lady whom you serue

   Char. Oh excellent, I loue long life better then Figs

   Sooth. You haue seene and proued a fairer former fortune,
then that which is to approach

   Char. Then belike my Children shall haue no names:
Prythee how many Boyes and Wenches must I haue

   Sooth. If euery of your wishes had a wombe, & foretell
euery wish, a Million

   Char. Out Foole, I forgiue thee for a Witch

   Alex. You thinke none but your sheets are priuie to
your wishes

   Char. Nay come, tell Iras hers

   Alex. Wee'l know all our Fortunes

   Enob. Mine, and most of our Fortunes to night, shall
be drunke to bed

   Iras. There's a Palme presages Chastity, if nothing els

   Char. E'ne as the o're-flowing Nylus presageth Famine

   Iras. Go you wilde Bedfellow, you cannot Soothsay

   Char. Nay, if an oyly Palme bee not a fruitfull Prognostication,
I cannot scratch mine eare. Prythee tel her
but a worky day Fortune

   Sooth. Your Fortunes are alike

   Iras. But how, but how, giue me particulars

   Sooth. I haue said

   Iras. Am I not an inch of Fortune better then she?
  Char. Well, if you were but an inch of fortune better
then I: where would you choose it

   Iras. Not in my Husbands nose

   Char. Our worser thoughts Heauens mend

   Alexas. Come, his Fortune, his Fortune. Oh let him
mary a woman that cannot go, sweet Isis, I beseech thee,
and let her dye too, and giue him a worse, and let worse
follow worse, till the worst of all follow him laughing to
his graue, fifty-fold a Cuckold. Good Isis heare me this
Prayer, though thou denie me a matter of more waight:
good Isis I beseech thee

   Iras. Amen, deere Goddesse, heare that prayer of the
people. For, as it is a heart-breaking to see a handsome
man loose-Wiu'd, so it is a deadly sorrow, to beholde a
foule Knaue vncuckolded: Therefore deere Isis keep decorum,
and Fortune him accordingly

   Char. Amen

   Alex. Lo now, if it lay in their hands to make mee a
Cuckold, they would make themselues Whores, but
they'ld doo't.
Enter Cleopatra.

  Enob. Hush, heere comes Anthony

   Char. Not he, the Queene

   Cleo. Saue you, my Lord

   Enob. No Lady

   Cleo. Was he not heere?
  Char. No Madam

   Cleo. He was dispos'd to mirth, but on the sodaine
A Romane thought hath strooke him.
Enobarbus?
  Enob. Madam

   Cleo. Seeke him, and bring him hither: wher's Alexias?
  Alex. Heere at your seruice.
My Lord approaches.
Enter Anthony, with a Messenger.

  Cleo. We will not looke vpon him:
Go with vs.

Exeunt.

  Messen. Fuluia thy Wife,
First came into the Field

   Ant. Against my Brother Lucius?
  Messen. I: but soone that Warre had end,
And the times state
Made friends of them, ioynting their force 'gainst Caesar,
Whose better issue in the warre from Italy,
Vpon the first encounter draue them

   Ant. Well, what worst

   Mess. The Nature of bad newes infects the Teller

   Ant. When it concernes the Foole or Coward: On.
Things that are past, are done, with me. 'Tis thus,
Who tels me true, though in his Tale lye death,
I heare him as he flatter'd

   Mes. Labienus (this is stiffe-newes)
Hath with his Parthian Force
Extended Asia: from Euphrates his conquering
Banner shooke, from Syria to Lydia,
And to Ionia, whil'st-
  Ant. Anthony thou would'st say

   Mes. Oh my Lord

   Ant. Speake to me home,
Mince not the generall tongue, name
Cleopatra as she is call'd in Rome:
Raile thou in Fuluia's phrase, and taunt my faults
With such full License, as both Truth and Malice
Haue power to vtter. Oh then we bring forth weeds,
When our quicke windes lye still, and our illes told vs
Is as our earing: fare thee well awhile

   Mes. At your Noble pleasure.

Exit Messenger

Enter another Messenger.

  Ant. From Scicion how the newes? Speake there

   1.Mes. The man from Scicion,
Is there such an one?
  2.Mes. He stayes vpon your will

   Ant. Let him appeare:
These strong Egyptian Fetters I must breake,
Or loose my selfe in dotage.
Enter another Messenger with a Letter.

What are you?
  3.Mes. Fuluia thy wife is dead

   Ant. Where dyed she

   Mes. In Scicion, her length of sicknesse,
With what else more serious,
Importeth thee to know, this beares

   Antho. Forbeare me
There's a great Spirit gone, thus did I desire it:
What our contempts doth often hurle from vs,
We wish it ours againe. The present pleasure,
By reuolution lowring, does become
The opposite of it selfe: she's good being gon,
The hand could plucke her backe, that shou'd her on.
I must from this enchanting Queene breake off,
Ten thousand harmes, more then the illes I know
My idlenesse doth hatch.
Enter Enobarbus.

How now Enobarbus

   Eno. What's your pleasure, Sir?
  Anth. I must with haste from hence

   Eno. Why then we kill all our Women. We see how
mortall an vnkindnesse is to them, if they suffer our departure
death's the word

   Ant. I must be gone

   Eno. Vnder a compelling an occasion, let women die.
It were pitty to cast them away for nothing, though betweene
them and a great cause, they should be esteemed
nothing. Cleopatra catching but the least noyse of this,
dies instantly: I haue seene her dye twenty times vppon
farre poorer moment: I do think there is mettle in death,
which commits some louing acte vpon her, she hath such
a celerity in dying

   Ant. She is cunning past mans thought

   Eno. Alacke Sir no, her passions are made of nothing
but the finest part of pure Loue. We cannot cal her winds
and waters, sighes and teares: They are greater stormes
and Tempests then Almanackes can report. This cannot
be cunning in her; if it be, she makes a showre of Raine
as well as Ioue

   Ant. Would I had neuer seene her

   Eno. Oh sir, you had then left vnseene a wonderfull
peece of worke, which not to haue beene blest withall,
would haue discredited your Trauaile

   Ant. Fuluia is dead

   Eno. Sir

   Ant. Fuluia is dead

   Eno. Fuluia?
  Ant. Dead

   Eno. Why sir, giue the Gods a thankefull Sacrifice:
when it pleaseth their Deities to take the wife of a man
from him, it shewes to man the Tailors of the earth: comforting
therein, that when olde Robes are worne out,
there are members to make new. If there were no more
Women but Fuluia, then had you indeede a cut, and the
case to be lamented: This greefe is crown'd with Consolation,
your old Smocke brings foorth a new Petticoate,
and indeed the teares liue in an Onion, that should water
this sorrow

   Ant. The businesse she hath broached in the State,
Cannot endure my absence

   Eno. And the businesse you haue broach'd heere cannot
be without you, especially that of Cleopatra's, which
wholly depends on your abode

   Ant. No more light Answeres:
Let our Officers
Haue notice what we purpose. I shall breake
The cause of our Expedience to the Queene,
And get her loue to part. For not alone
The death of Fuluia, with more vrgent touches
Do strongly speake to vs: but the Letters too
Of many our contriuing Friends in Rome,
Petition vs at home. Sextus Pompeius
Haue giuen the dare to Caesar, and commands
The Empire of the Sea. Our slippery people,
Whose Loue is neuer link'd to the deseruer,
Till his deserts are past, begin to throw
Pompey the great, and all his Dignities
Vpon his Sonne, who high in Name and Power,
Higher then both in Blood and Life, stands vp
For the maine Souldier. Whose quality going on,
The sides o'th' world may danger. Much is breeding,

Which like the Coursers heire, hath yet but life,
And not a Serpents poyson. Say our pleasure,
To such whose places vnder vs, require
Our quicke remoue from hence

   Enob. I shall doo't.
Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Alexas, and Iras.

  Cleo. Where is he?
  Char. I did not see him since

   Cleo. See where he is,
Whose with him, what he does:
I did not send you. If you finde him sad,
Say I am dauncing: if in Myrth, report
That I am sodaine sicke. Quicke, and returne

   Char. Madam, me thinkes if you did loue him deerly,
You do not hold the method, to enforce
The like from him

   Cleo. What should I do, I do not?
  Ch. In each thing giue him way, crosse him in nothing

   Cleo. Thou teachest like a foole: the way to lose him

   Char. Tempt him not so too farre. I wish forbeare,
In time we hate that which we often feare.
Enter Anthony.

But heere comes Anthony

   Cleo. I am sicke, and sullen

   An. I am sorry to giue breathing to my purpose

   Cleo. Helpe me away deere Charmian, I shall fall,
It cannot be thus long, the sides of Nature
Will not sustaine it

   Ant. Now my deerest Queene

   Cleo. Pray you stand farther from mee

   Ant. What's the matter?
  Cleo. I know by that same eye ther's some good news.
What sayes the married woman you may goe?
Would she had neuer giuen you leaue to come.
Let her not say 'tis I that keepe you heere,
I haue no power vpon you: Hers you are

   Ant. The Gods best know

   Cleo. Oh neuer was there Queene
So mightily betrayed: yet at the first
I saw the Treasons planted

   Ant. Cleopatra

   Cleo. Why should I thinke you can be mine, & true,
(Though you in swearing shake the Throaned Gods)
Who haue beene false to Fuluia?
Riotous madnesse,
To be entangled with those mouth-made vowes,
Which breake themselues in swearing

   Ant. Most sweet Queene

   Cleo. Nay pray you seeke no colour for your going,
But bid farewell, and goe:
When you sued staying,
Then was the time for words: No going then,
Eternity was in our Lippes, and Eyes,
Blisse in our browes bent: none our parts so poore,
But was a race of Heauen. They are so still,
Or thou the greatest Souldier of the world,
Art turn'd the greatest Lyar

   Ant. How now Lady?
  Cleo. I would I had thy inches, thou should'st know
There were a heart in Egypt

   Ant. Heare me Queene:
The strong necessity of Time, commands
Our Seruices a-while: but my full heart
Remaines in vse with you. Our Italy,
Shines o're with ciuill Swords; Sextus Pompeius
Makes his approaches to the Port of Rome,
Equality of two Domesticke powers,
Breed scrupulous faction: The hated growne to strength
Are newly growne to Loue: The condemn'd Pompey,
Rich in his Fathers Honor, creepes apace
Into the hearts of such, as haue not thriued
Vpon the present state, whose Numbers threaten,
And quietnesse growne sicke of rest, would purge
By any desperate change: My more particular,
And that which most with you should safe my going,
Is Fuluias death

   Cleo. Though age from folly could not giue me freedom
It does from childishnesse. Can Fuluia dye?
  Ant. She's dead my Queene.
Looke heere, and at thy Soueraigne leysure read
The Garboyles she awak'd: at the last, best,
See when, and where shee died

   Cleo. O most false Loue!
Where be the Sacred Violles thou should'st fill
With sorrowfull water? Now I see, I see,
In Fuluias death, how mine receiu'd shall be

   Ant. Quarrell no more, but bee prepar'd to know
The purposes I beare: which are, or cease,
As you shall giue th' aduice. By the fire
That quickens Nylus slime, I go from hence
Thy Souldier, Seruant, making Peace or Warre,
As thou affects

   Cleo. Cut my Lace, Charmian come,
But let it be, I am quickly ill, and well,
So Anthony loues

   Ant. My precious Queene forbeare,
And giue true euidence to his Loue, which stands
An honourable Triall

   Cleo. So Fuluia told me.
I prythee turne aside, and weepe for her,
Then bid adiew to me, and say the teares
Belong to Egypt. Good now, play one Scene
Of excellent dissembling, and let it looke
Like perfect Honor

   Ant. You'l heat my blood no more?
  Cleo. You can do better yet: but this is meetly

   Ant. Now by Sword

   Cleo. And Target. Still he mends.
But this is not the best. Looke prythee Charmian,
How this Herculean Roman do's become
The carriage of his chafe

   Ant. Ile leaue you Lady

   Cleo. Courteous Lord, one word:
Sir, you and I must part, but that's not it:
Sir, you and I haue lou'd, but there's not it:
That you know well, something it is I would:
Oh, my Obliuion is a very Anthony,
And I am all forgotten

   Ant. But that your Royalty
Holds Idlenesse your subiect, I should take you
For Idlenesse it selfe

   Cleo. 'Tis sweating Labour,
To beare such Idlenesse so neere the heart
As Cleopatra this. But Sir, forgiue me,
Since my becommings kill me, when they do not
Eye well to you. Your Honor calles you hence,
Therefore be deafe to my vnpittied Folly,
And all the Gods go with you. Vpon your Sword
Sit Lawrell victory, and smooth successe
Be strew'd before your feete

   Ant. Let vs go.
Come: Our separation so abides and flies,
That thou reciding heere, goes yet with mee;
And I hence fleeting, heere remaine with thee.
Away.

Exeunt.

Enter Octauius reading a Letter, Lepidus, and their Traine.

  Caes You may see Lepidus, and henceforth know,
It is not Caesars Naturall vice, to hate
One great Competitor. From Alexandria
This is the newes: He fishes, drinkes, and wastes
The Lampes of night in reuell: Is not more manlike
Then Cleopatra: nor the Queene of Ptolomy
More Womanly then he. Hardly gaue audience
Or vouchsafe to thinke he had Partners. You
Shall finde there a man, who is th' abstracts of all faults,
That all men follow

   Lep. I must not thinke
There are, euils enow to darken all his goodnesse:
His faults in him, seeme as the Spots of Heauen,
More fierie by nights Blacknesse; Hereditarie,
Rather then purchaste: what he cannot change,
Then what he chooses

   Caes You are too indulgent. Let's graunt it is not
Amisse to tumble on the bed of Ptolomy,
To giue a Kingdome for a Mirth, to sit
And keepe the turne of Tipling with a Slaue,
To reele the streets at noone, and stand the Buffet
With knaues that smels of sweate: Say this becoms him
(As his composure must be rare indeed,
Whom these things cannot blemish) yet must Anthony
No way excuse his foyles, when we do beare
So great waight in his lightnesse. If he fill'd
His vacancie with his Voluptuousnesse,
Full surfets, and the drinesse of his bones,
Call on him for't. But to confound such time,
That drummes him from his sport, and speakes as lowd
As his owne State, and ours, 'tis to be chid:
As we rate Boyes, who being mature in knowledge,
Pawne their experience to their present pleasure,
And so rebell to iudgement.
Enter a Messenger.

  Lep. Heere's more newes

   Mes. Thy biddings haue beene done, & euerie houre
Most Noble Caesar, shalt thou haue report
How 'tis abroad. Pompey is strong at Sea,
And it appeares, he is belou'd of those
That only haue feard Caesar: to the Ports
The discontents repaire, and mens reports
Giue him much wrong'd

   Caes I should haue knowne no lesse,
It hath bin taught vs from the primall state
That he which is was wisht, vntill he were:
And the ebb'd man,
Ne're lou'd, till ne're worth loue,
Comes fear'd, by being lack'd. This common bodie,
Like to a Vagabond Flagge vpon the Streame,
Goes too, and backe, lacking the varrying tyde
To rot it selfe with motion

   Mes. Caesar I bring thee word,
Menacrates and Menas famous Pyrates
Makes the Sea serue them, which they eare and wound
With keeles of euery kinde. Many hot inrodes
They make in Italy, the Borders Maritime
Lacke blood to thinke on't, and flush youth reuolt,
No Vessell can peepe forth: but 'tis as soone
Taken as seene: for Pompeyes name strikes more
Then could his Warre resisted
  Caesar. Anthony,
Leaue thy lasciuious Vassailes. When thou once
Was beaten from Medena, where thou slew'st
Hirsius, and Pansa Consuls, at thy heele
Did Famine follow, whom thou fought'st against,
(Though daintily brought vp) with patience more
Then Sauages could suffer. Thou did'st drinke
The stale of Horses, and the gilded Puddle
Which Beasts would cough at. Thy pallat the[n] did daine
The roughest Berry, on the rudest Hedge.
Yea, like the Stagge, when Snow the Pasture sheets,
The barkes of Trees thou brows'd. On the Alpes,
It is reported thou did'st eate strange flesh,
Which some did dye to looke on: And all this
(It wounds thine Honor that I speake it now)
Was borne so like a Soldiour, that thy cheeke
So much as lank'd not

   Lep. 'Tis pitty of him

   Caes Let his shames quickely
Driue him to Rome, 'tis time we twaine
Did shew our selues i'th' Field, and to that end
Assemble me immediate counsell, Pompey
Thriues in our Idlenesse

   Lep. To morrow Caesar,
I shall be furnisht to informe you rightly
Both what by Sea and Land I can be able
To front this present time

   Caes Til which encounter, it is my busines too. Farwell

   Lep. Farwell my Lord, what you shal know mean time
Of stirres abroad, I shall beseech you Sir
To let me be partaker

   Caesar. Doubt not sir, I knew it for my Bond.

Exeunt.

Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, & Mardian.

  Cleo. Charmian

   Char. Madam

   Cleo. Ha, ha, giue me to drinke Mandragora

   Char. Why Madam?
  Cleo. That I might sleepe out this great gap of time:
My Anthony is away

   Char. You thinke of him too much

   Cleo. O 'tis Treason

   Char. Madam, I trust not so

   Cleo. Thou, Eunuch Mardian?
  Mar. What's your Highnesse pleasure?
  Cleo. Not now to heare thee sing. I take no pleasure
In ought an Eunuch ha's: Tis well for thee,
That being vnseminar'd, thy freer thoughts
May not flye forth of Egypt. Hast thou Affections?
  Mar. Yes gracious Madam

   Cleo. Indeed?
  Mar. Not in deed Madam, for I can do nothing
But what in deede is honest to be done:
Yet haue I fierce Affections, and thinke
What Venus did with Mars

   Cleo. Oh Charmion:
Where think'st thou he is now? Stands he, or sits he?
Or does he walke? Or is he on his Horse?
Oh happy horse to beare the weight of Anthony!
Do brauely Horse, for wot'st thou whom thou moou'st,
The demy Atlas of this Earth, the Arme
And Burganet of men. Hee's speaking now,
Or murmuring, where's my Serpent of old Nyle,
(For so he cals me:) Now I feede my selfe
With most delicious poyson. Thinke on me
That am with Phoebus amorous pinches blacke,
And wrinkled deepe in time. Broad-fronted Caesar,
When thou was't heere aboue the ground, I was
A morsell for a Monarke: and great Pompey
Would stand and make his eyes grow in my brow,
There would he anchor his Aspect, and dye
With looking on his life.
Enter Alexas from Caesar.

  Alex. Soueraigne of Egypt, haile

   Cleo. How much vnlike art thou Marke Anthony?
Yet comming from him, that great Med'cine hath
With his Tinct gilded thee.
How goes it with my braue Marke Anthonie?
  Alex. Last thing he did (deere Queene)
He kist the last of many doubled kisses
This Orient Pearle. His speech stickes in my heart

   Cleo. Mine eare must plucke it thence

   Alex. Good Friend, quoth he:
Say the firme Roman to great Egypt sends
This treasure of an Oyster: at whose foote
To mend the petty present, I will peece
Her opulent Throne, with Kingdomes. All the East,
(Say thou) shall call her Mistris. So he nodded,
And soberly did mount an Arme-gaunt Steede,
Who neigh'd so hye, that what I would haue spoke,
Was beastly dumbe by him

   Cleo. What was he sad, or merry?
  Alex. Like to the time o'th' yeare, between y extremes
Of hot and cold, he was nor sad nor merrie

   Cleo. Oh well diuided disposition: Note him,
Note him good Charmian, 'tis the man; but note him.
He was not sad, for he would shine on those
That make their lookes by his. He was not merrie,
Which seem'd to tell them, his remembrance lay
In Egypt with his ioy, but betweene both.
Oh heauenly mingle! Bee'st thou sad, or merrie,
The violence of either thee becomes,
So do's it no mans else. Met'st thou my Posts?
  Alex. I Madam, twenty seuerall Messengers.
Why do you send so thicke?
  Cleo. Who's borne that day, when I forget to send
to Anthonie, shall dye a Begger. Inke and paper Charmian.
Welcome my good Alexas. Did I Charmian, euer
loue Caesar so?
  Char. Oh that braue Caesar!
  Cleo. Be choak'd with such another Emphasis,
Say the braue Anthony

   Char. The valiant Caesar

   Cleo. By Isis, I will giue thee bloody teeth,
If thou with Caesar Paragon againe:
My man of men

   Char. By your most gracious pardon,
I sing but after you

   Cleo. My Sallad dayes,
When I was greene in iudgement, cold in blood,
To say, as I saide then. But come, away,
Get me Inke and Paper,
he shall haue euery day a seuerall greeting, or Ile vnpeople
Egypt.

Exeunt.

Enter Pompey, Menecrates, and Menas, in warlike manner.

  Pom. If the great Gods be iust, they shall assist
The deeds of iustest men

   Mene. Know worthy Pompey, that what they do delay,
they not deny

   Pom. Whiles we are sutors to their Throne, decayes
the thing we sue for

   Mene. We ignorant of our selues,
Begge often our owne harmes, which the wise Powres
Deny vs for our good: so finde we profit
By loosing of our Prayers

   Pom. I shall do well:
The people loue me, and the Sea is mine;
My powers are Cressent, and my Auguring hope
Sayes it will come to'th' full. Marke Anthony
In Egypt sits at dinner, and will make
No warres without doores. Caesar gets money where
He looses hearts: Lepidus flatters both,
Of both is flatter'd: but he neither loues,
Nor either cares for him

   Mene. Caesar and Lepidus are in the field,
A mighty strength they carry

   Pom. Where haue you this? 'Tis false

   Mene. From Siluius, Sir

   Pom. He dreames: I know they are in Rome together
Looking for Anthony: but all the charmes of Loue,
Salt Cleopatra soften thy wand lip,
Let Witchcraft ioyne with Beauty, Lust with both,
Tye vp the Libertine in a field of Feasts,
Keepe his Braine fuming. Epicurean Cookes,
Sharpen with cloylesse sawce his Appetite,
That sleepe and feeding may prorogue his Honour,
Euen till a Lethied dulnesse-
Enter Varrius.

How now Varrius?
  Var. This is most certaine, that I shall deliuer:
Marke Anthony is euery houre in Rome
Expected. Since he went from Egypt, 'tis
A space for farther Trauaile

   Pom. I could haue giuen lesse matter
A better eare. Menas, I did not thinke
This amorous Surfetter would haue donn'd his Helme
For such a petty Warre: His Souldiership
Is twice the other twaine: But let vs reare
The higher our Opinion, that our stirring
Can from the lap of Egypts Widdow, plucke
The neere Lust-wearied Anthony

   Mene. I cannot hope,
Caesar and Anthony shall well greet together;
His Wife that's dead, did trespasses to Caesar,
His Brother wan'd vpon him, although I thinke
Not mou'd by Anthony

   Pom. I know not Menas,
How lesser Enmities may giue way to greater,
Were't not that we stand vp against them all:
'Twer pregnant they should square between themselues,
For they haue entertained cause enough
To draw their swords: but how the feare of vs
May Ciment their diuisions, and binde vp
The petty difference, we yet not know:
Bee't as our Gods will haue't; it onely stands
Our liues vpon, to vse our strongest hands
Come Menas.

Exeunt.

Enter Enobarbus and Lepidus.

  Lep. Good Enobarbus, 'tis a worthy deed,
And shall become you well, to intreat your Captaine
To soft and gentle speech

   Enob. I shall intreat him
To answer like himselfe: if Caesar moue him,
Let Anthony looke ouer Caesars head,
And speake as lowd as Mars. By Iupiter,
Were I the wearer of Anthonio's Beard,
I would not shaue't to day

   Lep. 'Tis not a time for priuate stomacking

   Eno. Euery time serues for the matter that is then
borne in't

   Lep. But small to greater matters must giue way

   Eno. Not if the small come first

   Lep. Your speech is passion: but pray you stirre
No Embers vp. Heere comes the Noble Anthony.
Enter Anthony and Ventidius.

  Eno. And yonder Caesar.
Enter Caesar, Mecenas, and Agrippa.

  Ant. If we compose well heere, to Parthia:
Hearke Ventidius

   Caesar. I do not know Mecenas, aske Agrippa

   Lep. Noble Friends:
That which combin'd vs was most great, and let not
A leaner action rend vs. What's amisse,
May it be gently heard. When we debate
Our triuiall difference loud, we do commit
Murther in healing wounds. Then Noble Partners,
The rather for I earnestly beseech,
Touch you the sowrest points with sweetest tearmes,
Nor curstnesse grow to'th' matter

   Ant. 'Tis spoken well:
Were we before our Armies, and to fight,
I should do thus.
Flourish.

  Caes Welcome to Rome

   Ant. Thanke you

   Caes Sit

   Ant. Sit sir

   Caes Nay then

   Ant. I learne, you take things ill, which are not so:
Or being, concerne you not

   Caes I must be laught at, if or for nothing, or a little, I
Should say my selfe offended, and with you
Chiefely i'th' world. More laught at, that I should
Once name you derogately: when to sound your name
It not concern'd me

   Ant. My being in Egypt Caesar, what was't to you?
  Caes No more then my reciding heere at Rome
Might be to you in Egypt: yet if you there
Did practise on my State, your being in Egypt
Might be my question

   Ant. How intend you, practis'd?
  Caes You may be pleas'd to catch at mine intent,
By what did heere befall me. Your Wife and Brother
Made warres vpon me, and their contestation
Was Theame for you, you were the word of warre

   Ant. You do mistake your busines, my Brother neuer
Did vrge me in his Act: I did inquire it.
And haue my Learning from some true reports
That drew their swords with you, did he not rather
Discredit my authority with yours,
And make the warres alike against my stomacke,
Hauing alike your cause. Of this, my Letters
Before did satisfie you. If you'l patch a quarrell,
As matter whole you haue to make it with,
It must not be with this

   Caes You praise your selfe, by laying defects of iudgement
to me: but you patcht vp your excuses

   Anth. Not so, not so:
I know you could not lacke, I am certaine on't,
Very necessity of this thought, that I
Your Partner in the cause 'gainst which he fought,
Could not with gracefull eyes attend those Warres
Which fronted mine owne peace. As for my wife,
I would you had her spirit, in such another,
The third oth' world is yours, which with a Snaffle,
You may pace easie, but not such a wife

   Enobar. Would we had all such wiues, that the men
might go to Warres with the women

   Anth. So much vncurbable, her Garboiles (Caesar)
Made out of her impatience: which not wanted
Shrodenesse of policie to: I greeuing grant,
Did you too much disquiet, for that you must,
But say I could not helpe it

   Caesar. I wrote to you, when rioting in Alexandria you
Did pocket vp my Letters: and with taunts
Did gibe my Misiue out of audience

   Ant. Sir, he fell vpon me, ere admitted, then:
Three Kings I had newly feasted, and did want
Of what I was i'th' morning: but next day
I told him of my selfe, which was as much
As to haue askt him pardon. Let this Fellow
Be nothing of our strife: if we contend
Out of our question wipe him

   Caesar. You haue broken the Article of your oath,
which you shall neuer haue tongue to charge me with

   Lep. Soft Caesar

   Ant. No Lepidus, let him speake,
The Honour is Sacred which he talks on now,
Supposing that I lackt it: but on Caesar,
The Article of my oath

   Caesar. To lend me Armes, and aide when I requir'd
them, the which you both denied

   Anth. Neglected rather:
And then when poysoned houres had bound me vp
From mine owne knowledge, as neerely as I may,
Ile play the penitent to you. But mine honesty,
Shall not make poore my greatnesse, nor my power
Worke without it. Truth is, that Fuluia,
To haue me out of Egypt, made Warres heere,
For which my selfe, the ignorant motiue, do
So farre aske pardon, as befits mine Honour
To stoope in such a case

   Lep. 'Tis Noble spoken

   Mece. If it might please you, to enforce no further
The griefes betweene ye: to forget them quite,
Were to remember: that the present neede,
Speakes to attone you

   Lep. Worthily spoken Mecenas

   Enobar. Or if you borrow one anothers Loue for the
instant, you may when you heare no more words of
Pompey returne it againe: you shall haue time to wrangle
in, when you haue nothing else to do

   Anth. Thou art a Souldier, onely speake no more

   Enob. That trueth should be silent, I had almost forgot

   Anth. You wrong this presence, therefore speake no
more

   Enob. Go too then: your Considerate stone

   Caesar. I do not much dislike the matter, but
The manner of his speech: for't cannot be,
We shall remaine in friendship, our conditions
So diffring in their acts. Yet if I knew,
What Hoope should hold vs staunch from edge to edge
Ath' world: I would persue it

   Agri. Giue me leaue Caesar

   Caesar. Speake Agrippa

   Agri. Thou hast a Sister by the Mothers side, admir'd
Octauia: Great Mark Anthony is now a widdower

   Caesar. Say not, say Agrippa; if Cleopater heard you, your
proofe were well deserued of rashnesse

   Anth. I am not marryed Caesar: let me heere Agrippa
further speake

   Agri. To hold you in perpetuall amitie,
To make you Brothers, and to knit your hearts
With an vn-slipping knot, take Anthony,
Octauia to his wife: whose beauty claimes
No worse a husband then the best of men: whose
Vertue, and whose generall graces, speake
That which none else can vtter. By this marriage,
All little Ielousies which now seeme great,
And all great feares, which now import their dangers,
Would then be nothing. Truth's would be tales,
Where now halfe tales be truth's: her loue to both,
Would each to other, and all loues to both
Draw after her. Pardon what I haue spoke,
For 'tis a studied not a present thought,
By duty ruminated

   Anth. Will Caesar speake?
  Caesar. Not till he heares how Anthony is toucht,
With what is spoke already

   Anth. What power is in Agrippa,
If I would say Agrippa, be it so,
To make this good?
  Caesar. The power of Caesar,
And his power, vnto Octauia

   Anth. May I neuer
(To this good purpose, that so fairely shewes)
Dreame of impediment: let me haue thy hand
Further this act of Grace: and from this houre,
The heart of Brothers gouerne in our Loues,
And sway our great Designes

   Caesar. There's my hand:
A Sister I bequeath you, whom no Brother
Did euer loue so deerely. Let her liue
To ioyne our kingdomes, and our hearts, and neuer
Flie off our Loues againe

   Lepi. Happily, Amen

   Ant. I did not think to draw my Sword 'gainst Pompey,
For he hath laid strange courtesies, and great
Of late vpon me. I must thanke him onely,
Least my remembrance, suffer ill report:
At heele of that, defie him

   Lepi. Time cals vpon's,
Of vs must Pompey presently be sought,
Or else he seekes out vs

   Anth. Where lies he?
  Caesar. About the Mount-Mesena

   Anth. What is his strength by land?
  Caesar. Great, and encreasing:
But by Sea he is an absolute Master

   Anth. So is the Fame.
Would we had spoke together. Hast we for it,
Yet ere we put our selues in Armes, dispatch we
The businesse we haue talkt of

   Caesar. With most gladnesse,
And do inuite you to my Sisters view,
Whether straight Ile lead you

   Anth. Let vs Lepidus not lacke your companie

   Lep. Noble Anthony, not sickenesse should detaine
me.

Flourish. Exit omnes. Manet Enobarbus, Agrippa, Mecenas.

  Mec. Welcome from aegypt Sir

   Eno. Halfe the heart of Caesar, worthy Mecenas. My
honourable Friend Agrippa

   Agri. Good Enobarbus

   Mece. We haue cause to be glad, that matters are so
well disgested: you staid well by't in Egypt

   Enob. I Sir, we did sleepe day out of countenaunce:
and made the night light with drinking

   Mece. Eight Wilde-Boares rosted whole at a breakfast:
and but twelue persons there. Is this true?
  Eno. This was but as a Flye by an Eagle: we had much
more monstrous matter of Feast, which worthily deserued
noting

   Mecenas. She's a most triumphant Lady, if report be
square to her

   Enob. When she first met Marke Anthony, she purst
vp his heart vpon the Riuer of Sidnis

   Agri. There she appear'd indeed: or my reporter deuis'd
well for her

   Eno. I will tell you,
The Barge she sat in, like a burnisht Throne
Burnt on the water: the Poope was beaten Gold,
Purple the Sailes: and so perfumed that
The Windes were Loue-sicke.
With them the Owers were Siluer,
Which to the tune of Flutes kept stroke, and made
The water which they beate, to follow faster;
As amorous of their strokes. For her owne person,
It beggerd all discription, she did lye
In her Pauillion, cloth of Gold, of Tissue,
O're-picturing that Venus, where we see
The fancie out-worke Nature. On each side her,
Stood pretty Dimpled Boyes, like smiling Cupids,
With diuers coulour'd Fannes whose winde did seeme,
To gloue the delicate cheekes which they did coole,
And what they vndid did

   Agrip. Oh rare for Anthony

   Eno. Her Gentlewoman, like the Nereides,
So many Mer-maides tended her i'th' eyes,
And made their bends adornings. At the Helme,
A seeming Mer-maide steeres: The Silken Tackle,
Swell with the touches of those Flower-soft hands,
That yarely frame the office. From the Barge
A strange inuisible perfume hits the sense
Of the adiacent Wharfes. The Citty cast
Her people out vpon her: and Anthony
Enthron'd i'th' Market-place, did sit alone,
Whisling to'th' ayre: which but for vacancie,
Had gone to gaze on Cleopater too,
And made a gap in Nature

   Agri. Rare Egiptian

   Eno. Vpon her landing, Anthony sent to her,
Inuited her to Supper: she replyed,
It should be better, he became her guest:
Which she entreated, our Courteous Anthony,
Whom nere the word of no woman hard speake,
Being barber'd ten times o're, goes to the Feast;
And for his ordinary, paies his heart,
For what his eyes eate onely

   Agri. Royall Wench:
She made great Caesar lay his Sword to bed,
He ploughed her, and she cropt

   Eno. I saw her once
Hop forty Paces through the publicke streete,
And hauing lost her breath, she spoke, and panted,
That she did make defect, perfection,
And breathlesse powre breath forth

   Mece. Now Anthony, must leaue her vtterly

   Eno. Neuer he will not:
Age cannot wither her, nor custome stale
Her infinite variety: other women cloy
The appetites they feede, but she makes hungry,
Where most she satisfies. For vildest things
Become themselues in her, that the holy Priests
Blesse her, when she is Riggish

   Mece. If Beauty, Wisedome, Modesty, can settle
The heart of Anthony: Octauia is
A blessed Lottery to him

   Agrip. Let vs go. Good Enobarbus, make your selfe
my guest, whilst you abide heere

   Eno. Humbly Sir I thanke you.

Exeunt.

Enter Anthony, Caesar, Octauia betweene them.

  Anth. The world, and my great office, will
Sometimes deuide me from your bosome

   Octa. All which time, before the Gods my knee shall
bowe my prayers to them for you

   Anth. Goodnight Sir. My Octauia
Read not my blemishes in the worlds report:
I haue not kept my square, but that to come
Shall all be done byth' Rule: good night deere Lady:
Good night Sir

   Caesar. Goodnight.
Enter.

Enter Soothsaier.

  Anth. Now sirrah: you do wish your selfe in Egypt?
  Sooth. Would I had neuer come from thence, nor you
thither

   Ant. If you can, your reason?
  Sooth. I see it in my motion: haue it not in my tongue,
But yet hie you to Egypt againe

   Antho. Say to me, whose Fortunes shall rise higher
Caesars or mine?
  Sooth. Caesars. Therefore (oh Anthony) stay not by his side
Thy Daemon that thy spirit which keepes thee, is
Noble, Couragious, high vnmatchable,
Where Caesars is not. But neere him, thy Angell
Becomes a feare: as being o're-powr'd, therefore
Make space enough betweene you

   Anth. Speake this no more

   Sooth. To none but thee no more but: when to thee,
If thou dost play with him at any game,
Thou art sure to loose: And of that Naturall lucke,
He beats thee 'gainst the oddes. Thy Luster thickens,
When he shines by: I say againe, thy spirit
Is all affraid to gouerne thee neere him:
But he alway 'tis Noble

   Anth. Get thee gone:
Say to Ventigius I would speake with him.
Enter.

He shall to Parthia, be it Art or hap,
He hath spoken true. The very Dice obey him,
And in our sports my better cunning faints,
Vnder his chance, if we draw lots he speeds,
His Cocks do winne the Battaile, still of mine,
When it is all to naught: and his Quailes euer
Beate mine (in hoopt) at odd's. I will to Egypte:
And though I make this marriage for my peace,
I'th' East my pleasure lies. Oh come Ventigius.

Enter Ventigius.

You must to Parthia, your Commissions ready:
Follow me, and reciue't.

Exeunt.

Enter Lepidus, Mecenas and Agrippa.

  Lepidus. Trouble your selues no further: pray you
hasten your Generals after

   Agr. Sir, Marke Anthony, will e'ne but kisse Octauia,
and weele follow

   Lepi. Till I shall see you in your Souldiers dresse,
Which will become you both: Farewell

   Mece. We shall: as I conceiue the iourney, be at
Mount before you Lepidus

   Lepi. Your way is shorter, my purposes do draw me
much about, you'le win two dayes vpon me

   Both. Sir good successe

   Lepi. Farewell.

Exeunt.

Enter Cleopater, Charmian, Iras, and Alexas.

  Cleo. Giue me some Musicke: Musicke, moody foode
of vs that trade in Loue

   Omnes. The Musicke, hoa.
Enter Mardian the Eunuch.

  Cleo. Let it alone, let's to Billiards: come Charmian

   Char. My arme is sore, best play with Mardian

   Cleopa. As well a woman with an Eunuch plaide, as
with a woman. Come you'le play with me Sir?
  Mardi. As well as I can Madam

   Cleo. And when good will is shewed,
Though't come to short
The Actor may pleade pardon. Ile none now,
Giue me mine Angle, weele to'th' Riuer there
My Musicke playing farre off. I will betray
Tawny fine fishes, my bended hooke shall pierce
Their slimy iawes: and as I draw them vp,
Ile thinke them euery one an Anthony,
And say, ah ha; y'are caught

   Char. 'Twas merry when you wager'd on your Angling,
when your diuer did hang a salt fish on his hooke
which he with feruencie drew vp

   Cleo. That time? Oh times:
I laught him out of patience: and that night
I laught him into patience, and next morne,
Ere the ninth houre, I drunke him to his bed:
Then put my Tires and Mantles on him, whilst
I wore his Sword Phillippan. Oh from Italie,
Enter a Messenger.

Ramme thou thy fruitefull tidings in mine eares,
That long time haue bin barren

   Mes. Madam, Madam

   Cleo. Anthonyo's dead.
If thou say so Villaine, thou kil'st thy Mistris:
But well and free, if thou so yeild him.
There is Gold, and heere
My blewest vaines to kisse: a hand that Kings
Haue lipt, and trembled kissing

   Mes. First Madam, he is well

   Cleo. Why there's more Gold.
But sirrah marke, we vse
To say, the dead are well: bring it to that,
The Gold I giue thee, will I melt and powr
Downe thy ill vttering throate

   Mes. Good Madam heare me

   Cleo. Well, go too I will:
But there's no goodnesse in thy face if Anthony
Be free and healthfull; so tart a fauour
To trumpet such good tidings. If not well,
Thou shouldst come like a Furie crown'd with Snakes,
Not like a formall man

   Mes. Wilt please you heare me?
  Cleo. I haue a mind to strike thee ere thou speak'st:
Yet if thou say Anthony liues, 'tis well,
Or friends with Caesar, or not Captiue to him,
Ile set thee in a shower of Gold, and haile
Rich Pearles vpon thee

   Mes. Madam, he's well

   Cleo. Well said

   Mes. And Friends with Caesar

   Cleo. Th'art an honest man

   Mes. Caesar, and he, are greater Friends then euer

   Cleo. Make thee a Fortune from me

   Mes. But yet Madam

   Cleo. I do not like but yet, it does alay
The good precedence, fie vpon but yet,
But yet is as a Iaylor to bring foorth
Some monstrous Malefactor. Prythee Friend,
Powre out the packe of matter to mine eare,
The good and bad together: he's friends with Caesar,
In state of health thou saist, and thou saist, free

   Mes. Free Madam, no: I made no such report,
He's bound vnto Octauia

   Cleo. For what good turne?
  Mes. For the best turne i'th' bed

   Cleo. I am pale Charmian

   Mes. Madam, he's married to Octauia

   Cleo. The most infectious Pestilence vpon thee.

Strikes him downe.

  Mes. Good Madam patience

   Cleo. What say you?

Strikes him.

Hence horrible Villaine, or Ile spurne thine eyes
Like balls before me: Ile vnhaire thy head,

She hales him vp and downe.

Thou shalt be whipt with Wyer, and stew'd in brine,
Smarting in lingring pickle

   Mes. Gratious Madam,
I that do bring the newes, made not the match

   Cleo. Say 'tis not so, a Prouince I will giue thee,
And make thy Fortunes proud: the blow thou had'st
Shall make thy peace, for mouing me to rage,
And I will boot thee with what guift beside
Thy modestie can begge

   Mes. He's married Madam

   Cleo. Rogue, thou hast liu'd too long.

Draw a knife.

  Mes. Nay then Ile runne:
What meane you Madam, I haue made no fault.
Enter.

  Char. Good Madam keepe your selfe within your selfe,
The man is innocent

   Cleo. Some Innocents scape not the thunderbolt:
Melt Egypt into Nyle: and kindly creatures
Turne all to Serpents. Call the slaue againe,
Though I am mad, I will not byte him: Call?
  Char. He is afeard to come

   Cleo. I will not hurt him,
These hands do lacke Nobility, that they strike
A meaner then my selfe: since I my selfe
Haue giuen my selfe the cause. Come hither Sir.
Enter the Messenger againe.

Though it be honest, it is neuer good
To bring bad newes: giue to a gratious Message
An host of tongues, but let ill tydings tell
Themselues, when they be felt

   Mes. I haue done my duty

   Cleo. Is he married?
I cannot hate thee worser then I do,
If thou againe say yes

   Mes. He's married Madam

   Cleo. The Gods confound thee,
Dost thou hold there still?
  Mes. Should I lye Madame?
  Cleo. Oh, I would thou didst:
So halfe my Egypt were submerg'd and made
A Cesterne for scal'd Snakes. Go get thee hence,
Had'st thou Narcissus in thy face to me,
Thou would'st appeere most vgly: He is married?
  Mes. I craue your Highnesse pardon

   Cleo. He is married?
  Mes. Take no offence, that I would not offend you,
To punnish me for what you make me do
Seemes much vnequall, he's married to Octauia

   Cleo. Oh that his fault should make a knaue of thee,
That art not what th'art sure of. Get thee hence,
The Marchandize which thou hast brought from Rome
Are all too deere for me:
Lye they vpon thy hand, and be vndone by em

   Char. Good your Highnesse patience

   Cleo. In praysing Anthony, I haue disprais'd Caesar

   Char. Many times Madam

   Cleo. I am paid for't now: lead me from hence,
I faint, oh Iras, Charmian: 'tis no matter.
Go to the Fellow, good Alexas bid him
Report the feature of Octauia: her yeares,
Her inclination, let him not leaue out
The colour of her haire. Bring me word quickly,
Let him for euer go, let him not Charmian,
Though he be painted one way like a Gorgon,
The other wayes a Mars. Bid you Alexas
Bring me word, how tall she is: pitty me Charmian,
But do not speake to me. Lead me to my Chamber.

Exeunt.

Flourish. Enter Pompey, at one doore with Drum and Trumpet: at
another
Caesar, Lepidus, Anthony, Enobarbus, Mecenas, Agrippa, Menas
with Souldiers
Marching.

  Pom. Your Hostages I haue, so haue you mine:
And we shall talke before we fight

   Caesar. Most meete that first we come to words,
And therefore haue we
Our written purposes before vs sent,
Which if thou hast considered, let vs know,
If 'twill tye vp thy discontented Sword,
And carry backe to Cicelie much tall youth,
That else must perish heere

   Pom. To you all three,
The Senators alone of this great world,
Chiefe Factors for the Gods. I do not know,
Wherefore my Father should reuengers want,
Hauing a Sonne and Friends, since Iulius Caesar,
Who at Phillippi the good Brutus ghosted,
There saw you labouring for him. What was't
That mou'd pale Cassius to conspire? And what
Made all-honor'd, honest, Romaine Brutus,
With the arm'd rest, Courtiers of beautious freedome,
To drench the Capitoll, but that they would
Haue one man but a man, and that his it
Hath made me rigge my Nauie. At whose burthen,
The anger'd Ocean fomes, with which I meant
To scourge th' ingratitude, that despightfull Rome
Cast on my Noble Father

   Caesar. Take your time

   Ant. Thou can'st not feare vs Pompey with thy sailes.
Weele speake with thee at Sea. At land thou know'st
How much we do o're-count thee

   Pom. At Land indeed
Thou dost orecount me of my Fathers house:
But since the Cuckoo buildes not for himselfe,
Remaine in't as thou maist

   Lepi. Be pleas'd to tell vs,
(For this is from the present how you take)
The offers we haue sent you

   Caesar. There's the point

   Ant. Which do not be entreated too,
But waigh what it is worth imbrac'd
  Caesar. And what may follow to try a larger Fortune

   Pom. You haue made me offer
Of Cicelie, Sardinia: and I must
Rid all the Sea of Pirats. Then, to send
Measures of Wheate to Rome: this greed vpon,
To part with vnhackt edges, and beare backe
Our Targes vndinted

   Omnes. That's our offer

   Pom. Know then I came before you heere,
A man prepar'd
To take this offer. But Marke Anthony,
Put me to some impatience: though I loose
The praise of it by telling. You must know
When Caesar and your Brother were at blowes,
Your Mother came to Cicelie, and did finde
Her welcome Friendly

   Ant. I haue heard it Pompey,
And am well studied for a liberall thanks,
Which I do owe you

   Pom. Let me haue your hand:
I did not thinke Sir, to haue met you heere,
  Ant. The beds i'th' East are soft, and thanks to you,
That cal'd me timelier then my purpose hither:
For I haue gained by't

   Caesar. Since I saw you last, ther's a change vpon you

   Pom. Well, I know not,
What counts harsh Fortune cast's vpon my face,
But in my bosome shall she neuer come,
To make my heart her vassaile

   Lep. Well met heere

   Pom. I hope so Lepidus, thus we are agreed:
I craue our composion may be written
And seal'd betweene vs,
  Caesar. That's the next to do

   Pom. Weele feast each other, ere we part, and lett's
Draw lots who shall begin

   Ant. That will I Pompey

   Pompey. No Anthony take the lot: but first or last,
your fine Egyptian cookerie shall haue the fame, I haue
heard that Iulius Caesar, grew fat with feasting there

   Anth. You haue heard much

   Pom. I haue faire meaning Sir

   Ant. And faire words to them

   Pom. Then so much haue I heard,
And I haue heard Appolodorus carried-
  Eno. No more that: he did so

   Pom. What I pray you?
  Eno. A certaine Queene to Caesar in a Matris

   Pom. I know thee now, how far'st thou Souldier?
  Eno. Well, and well am like to do, for I perceiue
Foure Feasts are toward

   Pom. Let me shake thy hand,
I neuer hated thee: I haue seene thee fight,
When I haue enuied thy behauiour

   Enob. Sir, I neuer lou'd you much, but I ha' prais'd ye,
When you haue well deseru'd ten times as much,
As I haue said you did

   Pom. Inioy thy plainnesse,
It nothing ill becomes thee:
Aboord my Gally, I inuite you all.
Will you leade Lords?
  All. Shew's the way, sir

   Pom. Come.

Exeunt. Manet Enob. & Menas]
  Men. Thy Father Pompey would ne're haue made this
Treaty. You, and I haue knowne sir

   Enob. At Sea, I thinke

   Men. We haue Sir

   Enob. You haue done well by water

   Men. And you by Land

   Enob. I will praise any man that will praise me, thogh
it cannot be denied what I haue done by Land

   Men. Nor what I haue done by water

   Enob. Yes some-thing you can deny for your owne
safety: you haue bin a great Theefe by Sea

   Men. And you by Land

   Enob. There I deny my Land seruice: but giue mee
your hand Menas, if our eyes had authority, heere they
might take two Theeues kissing

   Men. All mens faces are true, whatsomere their hands
are

   Enob. But there is neuer a fayre Woman, ha's a true
Face

   Men. No slander, they steale hearts

   Enob. We came hither to fight with you

   Men. For my part, I am sorry it is turn'd to a Drinking.
Pompey doth this day laugh away his Fortune

   Enob. If he do, sure he cannot weep't backe againe

   Men. Y'haue said Sir, we look'd not for Marke Anthony
heere, pray you, is he married to Cleopatra?
  Enob. Caesars Sister is call'd Octauia

   Men. True Sir, she was the wife of Caius Marcellus

   Enob. But she is now the wife of Marcus Anthonius

   Men. Pray'ye sir

   Enob. 'Tis true

   Men. Then is Caesar and he, for euer knit together

   Enob. If I were bound to Diuine of this vnity, I wold
not Prophesie so

   Men. I thinke the policy of that purpose, made more
in the Marriage, then the loue of the parties

   Enob. I thinke so too. But you shall finde the band
that seemes to tye their friendship together, will bee the
very strangler of their Amity: Octauia is of a holy, cold,
and still conuersation

   Men. Who would not haue his wife so?
  Eno. Not he that himselfe is not so: which is Marke
Anthony: he will to his Egyptian dish againe: then shall
the sighes of Octauia blow the fire vp in Caesar, and (as I
said before) that which is the strength of their Amity,
shall proue the immediate Author of their variance. Anthony
will vse his affection where it is. Hee married but
his occasion heere

   Men. And thus it may be. Come Sir, will you aboord?
I haue a health for you

   Enob. I shall take it sir: we haue vs'd our Throats in
Egypt

   Men. Come, let's away.

Exeunt.

Musicke playes. Enter two or three Seruants with a Banket.

  1 Heere they'l be man: some o' their Plants are ill
rooted already, the least winde i'th' world wil blow them
downe

   2 Lepidus is high Coulord

   1 They haue made him drinke Almes drinke

   2 As they pinch one another by the disposition, hee
cries out, no more; reconciles them to his entreatie, and
himselfe to'th' drinke

   1 But it raises the greater warre betweene him & his
discretion

   2 Why this it is to haue a name in great mens Fellowship:
I had as liue haue a Reede that will doe me no
seruice, as a Partizan I could not heaue

   1 To be call'd into a huge Sphere, and not to be seene
to moue in't, are the holes where eyes should bee, which
pittifully disaster the cheekes.

A Sennet sounded. Enter Caesar, Anthony, Pompey, Lepidus,
Agrippa,
Mecenas, Enobarbus, Menes, with other Captaines.

  Ant. Thus do they Sir: they take the flow o'th' Nyle
By certaine scales i'th' Pyramid: they know
By'th' height, the lownesse, or the meane: If dearth
Or Foizon follow. The higher Nilus swels,
The more it promises: as it ebbes, the Seedsman
Vpon the slime and Ooze scatters his graine,
And shortly comes to Haruest

   Lep. Y'haue strange Serpents there?
  Anth. I Lepidus

   Lep. Your Serpent of Egypt, is bred now of your mud
by the operation of your Sun: so is your Crocodile

   Ant. They are so

   Pom. Sit, and some Wine: A health to Lepidus

   Lep. I am not so well as I should be:
But Ile ne're out

   Enob. Not till you haue slept: I feare me you'l bee in
till then

   Lep. Nay certainly, I haue heard the Ptolomies Pyramisis
are very goodly things: without contradiction I
haue heard that

   Menas. Pompey, a word

   Pomp. Say in mine eare, what is't

   Men. Forsake thy seate I do beseech thee Captaine,
And heare me speake a word

   Pom. Forbeare me till anon.

Whispers in's Eare.

This Wine for Lepidus

   Lep. What manner o' thing is your Crocodile?
  Ant. It is shap'd sir like it selfe, and it is as broad as it
hath bredth; It is iust so high as it is, and mooues with it
owne organs. It liues by that which nourisheth it, and
the Elements once out of it, it Transmigrates

   Lep. What colour is it of?
  Ant. Of it owne colour too

   Lep. 'Tis a strange Serpent

   Ant. 'Tis so, and the teares of it are wet

   Caes Will this description satisfie him?
  Ant. With the Health that Pompey giues him, else he
is a very Epicure

   Pomp. Go hang sir, hang: tell me of that? Away:
Do as I bid you. Where's this Cup I call'd for?
  Men. If for the sake of Merit thou wilt heare mee,
Rise from thy stoole

   Pom. I thinke th'art mad: the matter?
  Men. I haue euer held my cap off to thy Fortunes

   Pom. Thou hast seru'd me with much faith: what's
else to say? Be iolly Lords

   Anth. These Quicke-sands Lepidus,
Keepe off, them for you sinke

   Men. Wilt thou be Lord of all the world?
  Pom. What saist thou?
  Men. Wilt thou be Lord of the whole world?
That's twice

   Pom. How should that be?
  Men. But entertaine it, and though thou thinke me
poore, I am the man will giue thee all the world

   Pom. Hast thou drunke well

   Men. No Pompey, I haue kept me from the cup,
Thou art if thou dar'st be, the earthly Ioue:
What ere the Ocean pales, or skie inclippes,
Is thine, if thou wilt ha't

   Pom. Shew me which way?
  Men. These three World-sharers, these Competitors
Are in thy vessell. Let me cut the Cable,
And when we are put off, fall to their throates:
All there is thine

   Pom. Ah, this thou shouldst haue done,
And not haue spoke on't. In me 'tis villanie,
In thee, 't had bin good seruice: thou must know,
'Tis not my profit that does lead mine Honour:
Mine Honour it, Repent that ere thy tongue,
Hath so betraide thine acte. Being done vnknowne,
I should haue found it afterwards well done,
But must condemne it now: desist, and drinke

   Men. For this, Ile neuer follow
Thy paul'd Fortunes more,
Who seekes and will not take, when once 'tis offer'd,
Shall neuer finde it more

   Pom. This health to Lepidus

   Ant. Beare him ashore,
Ile pledge it for him Pompey

   Eno. Heere's to thee Menas

   Men. Enobarbus, welcome

   Pom. Fill till the cup be hid

   Eno. There's a strong Fellow Menas

   Men. Why?
  Eno. A beares the third part of the world man: seest
not?
  Men. The third part, then he is drunk: would it were
all, that it might go on wheeles

   Eno. Drinke thou: encrease the Reeles

   Men. Come

   Pom. This is not yet an Alexandrian Feast

   Ant. It ripen's, towards it: strike the Vessells hoa.
Heere's to Caesar

   Caesar. I could well forbear't, it's monstrous labour
when I wash my braine, and it grow fouler

   Ant. Be a Child o'th' time

   Caesar. Possesse it, Ile make answer: but I had rather
fast from all, foure dayes, then drinke so much in one

   Enob. Ha my braue Emperour, shall we daunce now
the Egyptian Backenals, and celebrate our drinke?
  Pom. Let's ha't good Souldier

   Ant. Come, let's all take hands,
Till that the conquering Wine hath steep't our sense,
In soft and delicate Lethe

   Eno. All take hands:
Make battery to our eares with the loud Musicke,
The while, Ile place you, then the Boy shall sing.
The holding euery man shall beate as loud,
As his strong sides can volly.

Musicke Playes. Enobarbus places them hand in hand.

The Song.

Come thou Monarch of the Vine,
Plumpie Bacchus, with pinke eyne:
In thy Fattes our Cares be drown'd,
With thy Grapes our haires be Crown'd.
Cup vs till the world go round,
Cup vs till the world go round

   Caesar. What would you more?
Pompey goodnight. Good Brother
Let me request you of our grauer businesse
Frownes at this leuitie. Gentle Lords let's part,
You see we haue burnt our cheekes. Strong Enobarbe
Is weaker then the Wine, and mine owne tongue
Spleet's what it speakes: the wilde disguise hath almost
Antickt vs all. What needs more words? goodnight.
Good Anthony your hand

   Pom. Ile try you on the shore

   Anth. And shall Sir, giues your hand

   Pom. Oh Anthony, you haue my Father house.
But what, we are Friends?
Come downe into the Boate

   Eno. Take heed you fall not Menas: Ile not on shore,
No to my Cabin: these Drummes,
These Trumpets, Flutes: what
Let Neptune heare, we bid aloud farewell
To these great Fellowes. Sound and be hang'd, sound out.

Sound a Flourish with Drummes.

  Enor. Hoo saies a there's my Cap

   Men. Hoa, Noble Captaine, come.

Exeunt.

Enter Ventidius as it were in triumph, the dead body of Pacorus
borne
before him.

  Ven. Now darting Parthya art thou stroke, and now
Pleas'd Fortune does of Marcus Crassus death
Make me reuenger. Beare the Kings Sonnes body,
Before our Army, thy Pacorus Orades,
Paies this for Marcus Crassus

   Romaine. Noble Ventidius,
Whil'st yet with Parthian blood thy Sword is warme,
The Fugitiue Parthians follow. Spurre through Media,
Mesapotamia, and the shelters, whether
The routed flie. So thy grand Captaine Anthony
Shall set thee on triumphant Chariots, and
Put Garlands on thy head

   Ven. Oh Sillius, Sillius,
I haue done enough. A lower place note well
May make too great an act. For learne this Sillius,
Better to leaue vndone, then by our deed
Acquire too high a Fame, when him we serues away.
Caesar and Anthony, haue euer wonne
More in their officer, then person. Sossius
One of my place in Syria, his Lieutenant,
For quicke accumulation of renowne,
Which he atchiu'd by'th' minute, lost his fauour.
Who does i'th' Warres more then his Captaine can,
Becomes his Captaines Captaine: and Ambition
(The Souldiers vertue) rather makes choise of losse
Then gaine, which darkens him.
I could do more to do Anthonius good,
But 'twould offend him. And in his offence,
Should my performance perish

   Rom. Thou hast Ventidius that, without the which a
Souldier and his Sword graunts scarce distinction: thou
wilt write to Anthony

   Ven. Ile humbly signifie what in his name,
That magicall word of Warre we haue effected,
How with his Banners, and his well paid ranks,
The nere-yet beaten Horse of Parthia,
We haue iaded out o'th' Field

   Rom. Where is he now?
  Ven. He purposeth to Athens, whither with what hast
The waight we must conuay with's, will permit:
We shall appeare before him. On there, passe along.

Exeunt.

Enter Agrippa at one doore, Enobarbus at another.

  Agri. What are the Brothers parted?
  Eno. They haue dispatcht with Pompey, he is gone,
The other three are Sealing. Octauia weepes
To part from Rome: Caesar is sad, and Lepidus
Since Pompey's feast, as Menas saies, is troubled
With the Greene-Sicknesse

   Agri. 'Tis a Noble Lepidus

   Eno. A very fine one: oh, how he loues Caesar

   Agri. Nay but how deerely he adores Mark Anthony

   Eno. Caesar? why he's the Iupiter of men

   Ant. What's Anthony, the God of Iupiter?
  Eno. Spake you of Caesar? How, the non-pareill?
  Agri. Oh Anthony, oh thou Arabian Bird!
  Eno. Would you praise Caesar, say Caesar go no further

   Agr. Indeed he plied them both with excellent praises

   Eno. But he loues Caesar best, yet he loues Anthony:
Hoo, Hearts, Tongues, Figure,
Scribes, Bards, Poets, cannot
Thinke speake, cast, write, sing, number: hoo,
His loue to Anthony. But as for Caesar,
Kneele downe, kneele downe, and wonder

   Agri. Both he loues

   Eno. They are his Shards, and he their Beetle, so:
This is to horse: Adieu, Noble Agrippa

   Agri. Good Fortune worthy Souldier, and farewell.
Enter Caesar, Anthony, Lepidus, and Octauia.

  Antho. No further Sir

   Caesar. You take from me a great part of my selfe:
Vse me well in't. Sister, proue such a wife
As my thoughts make thee, and as my farthest Band
Shall passe on thy approofe: most Noble Anthony,
Let not the peece of Vertue which is set
Betwixt vs, as the Cyment of our loue
To keepe it builded, be the Ramme to batter
The Fortresse of it: for better might we
Haue lou'd without this meane, if on both parts
This be not cherisht

   Ant. Make me not offended, in your distrust

   Caesar. I haue said

   Ant. You shall not finde,
Though you be therein curious, the lest cause
For what you seeme to feare, so the Gods keepe you,
And make the hearts of Romaines serue your ends:
We will heere part


   Caesar. Farewell my deerest Sister, fare thee well,
The Elements be kind to thee, and make
Thy spirits all of comfort: fare thee well

   Octa. My Noble Brother

   Anth. The Aprill's in her eyes, it is Loues spring,
And these the showers to bring it on: be cheerfull

   Octa. Sir, looke well to my Husbands house: and-
  Caesar. What Octauia?
  Octa. Ile tell you in your eare

   Ant. Her tongue will not obey her heart, nor can
Her heart informe her tongue.
The Swannes downe feather
That stands vpon the Swell at the full of Tide:
And neither way inclines

   Eno. Will Caesar weepe?
  Agr. He ha's a cloud in's face

   Eno. He were the worse for that were he a Horse, so is
he being a man

   Agri. Why Enobarbus:
When Anthony found Iulius Caesar dead,
He cried almost to roaring: And he wept,
When at Phillippi he found Brutus slaine

   Eno. That year indeed, he was trobled with a rheume,
What willingly he did confound, he wail'd,
Beleeu't till I weepe too

   Caesar. No sweet Octauia,
You shall heare from me still: the time shall not
Out-go my thinking on you

   Ant. Come Sir, come,
Ile wrastle with you in my strength of loue,
Looke heere I haue you, thus I let you go,
And giue you to the Gods

   Caesar. Adieu, be happy

   Lep. Let all the number of the Starres giue light
To thy faire way

   Caesar. Farewell, farewell.

Kisses Octauia.

  Ant. Farewell.

Trumpets sound. Exeunt.

Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Alexas.

  Cleo. Where is the Fellow?
  Alex. Halfe afeard to come

   Cleo. Go too, go too: Come hither Sir.
Enter the Messenger as before.

  Alex. Good Maiestie: Herod of Iury dare not looke
vpon you, but when you are well pleas'd

   Cleo. That Herods head, Ile haue: but how? When
Anthony is gone, through whom I might commaund it:
Come thou neere

   Mes. Most gratious Maiestie

   Cleo. Did'st thou behold Octauia?
  Mes. I dread Queene

   Cleo. Where?
  Mes. Madam in Rome, I lookt her in the face: and
saw her led betweene her Brother, and Marke Anthony

   Cleo. Is she as tall as me?
  Mes. She is not Madam

   Cleo. Didst heare her speake?
Is she shrill tongu'd or low?
  Mes. Madam, I heard her speake, she is low voic'd

   Cleo. That's not so good: he cannot like her long

   Char. Like her? Oh Isis: 'tis impossible

   Cleo. I thinke so Charmian: dull of tongue, & dwarfish
What Maiestie is in her gate, remember
If ere thou look'st on Maiestie

   Mes. She creepes: her motion, & her station are as one.
She shewes a body, rather then a life,
A Statue, then a Breather

   Cleo. Is this certaine?
  Mes. Or I haue no obseruance

   Cha. Three in Egypt cannot make better note

   Cleo. He's very knowing, I do perceiu't,
There's nothing in her yet.
The Fellow ha's good iudgement

   Char. Excellent

   Cleo. Guesse at her yeares, I prythee

   Mess. Madam, she was a widdow

   Cleo. Widdow? Charmian, hearke

   Mes. And I do thinke she's thirtie

   Cle. Bear'st thou her face in mind? is't long or round?
  Mess. Round, euen to faultinesse

   Cleo. For the most part too, they are foolish that are
so. Her haire what colour?
  Mess. Browne Madam: and her forehead
As low as she would wish it

   Cleo. There's Gold for thee,
Thou must not take my former sharpenesse ill,
I will employ thee backe againe: I finde thee
Most fit for businesse. Go, make thee ready,
Our Letters are prepar'd

   Char. A proper man

   Cleo. Indeed he is so: I repent me much
That so I harried him. Why me think's by him,
This Creature's no such thing

   Char. Nothing Madam

   Cleo. The man hath seene some Maiesty, and should
know

   Char. Hath he seene Maiestie? Isis else defend: and
seruing you so long

   Cleopa. I haue one thing more to aske him yet good
Charmian: but 'tis no matter, thou shalt bring him to me
where I will write; all may be well enough

   Char. I warrant you Madam.

Exeunt.

Enter Anthony and Octauia.

  Ant. Nay, nay Octauia, not onely that,
That were excusable, that and thousands more
Of semblable import, but he hath wag'd
New Warres 'gainst Pompey. Made his will, and read it,
To publicke eare, spoke scantly of me,
When perforce he could not
But pay me tearmes of Honour: cold and sickly
He vented then most narrow measure: lent me,
When the best hint was giuen him: he not took't,
Or did it from his teeth

   Octaui. Oh my good Lord,
Beleeue not all, or if you must beleeue,
Stomacke not all. A more vnhappie Lady,
If this deuision chance, ne're stood betweene
Praying for both parts:
The good Gods wil mocke me presently,
When I shall pray: Oh blesse my Lord, and Husband,
Vndo that prayer, by crying out as loud,
Oh blesse my Brother. Husband winne, winne Brother,
Prayes, and distroyes the prayer, no midway
'Twixt these extreames at all

   Ant. Gentle Octauia,
Let your best loue draw to that point which seeks
Best to preserue it: if I loose mine Honour,
I loose my selfe: better I were not yours
Then your so branchlesse. But as you requested,
Your selfe shall go between's, the meane time Lady,
Ile raise the preparation of a Warre
Shall staine your Brother, make your soonest hast,
So your desires are yours

   Oct. Thanks to my Lord,
The Ioue of power make me most weake, most weake,
Your reconciler: Warres 'twixt you twaine would be,
As if the world should cleaue, and that slaine men
Should soalder vp the Rift

   Anth. When it appeeres to you where this begins,
Turne your displeasure that way, for our faults
Can neuer be so equall, that your loue
Can equally moue with them. Prouide your going,
Choose your owne company, and command what cost
Your heart he's mind too.

Exeunt.

Enter Enobarbus, and Eros.

  Eno. How now Friend Eros?
  Eros. Ther's strange Newes come Sir

   Eno. What man?
  Ero. Caesar & Lepidus haue made warres vpon Pompey

   Eno. This is old, what is the successe?
  Eros. Caesar hauing made vse of him in the warres
'gainst Pompey: presently denied him riuality, would not
let him partake in the glory of the action, and not resting
here, accuses him of Letters he had formerly wrote to
Pompey. Vpon his owne appeale seizes him, so the poore
third is vp, till death enlarge his Confine

   Eno. Then would thou hadst a paire of chaps no more,
and throw betweene them all the food thou hast, they'le
grinde the other. Where's Anthony?
  Eros. He's walking in the garden thus, and spurnes
The rush that lies before him. Cries Foole Lepidus,
And threats the throate of that his Officer,
That murdred Pompey

   Eno. Our great Nauies rig'd

   Eros. For Italy and Caesar, more Domitius,
My Lord desires you presently: my Newes
I might haue told heareafter

   Eno. 'Twillbe naught, but let it be: bring me to Anthony

   Eros. Come Sir,

Exeunt.

Enter Agrippa, Mecenas, and Caesar.

  Caes Contemning Rome he ha's done all this, & more
In Alexandria: heere's the manner of't:
I'th' Market-place on a Tribunall siluer'd,
Cleopatra and himselfe in Chaires of Gold
Were publikely enthron'd: at the feet, sat
Caesarion whom they call my Fathers Sonne,
And all the vnlawfull issue, that their Lust
Since then hath made betweene them. Vnto her,
He gaue the stablishment of Egypt, made her
Of lower Syria, Cyprus, Lydia, absolute Queene

   Mece. This in the publike eye?
  Caesar. I'th' common shew place, where they exercise,
His Sonnes hither proclaimed the King of Kings,
Great Media, Parthia, and Armenia
He gaue to Alexander. To Ptolomy he assign'd,
Syria, Silicia, and Phoenetia: she
In th' abiliments of the Goddesse Isis
That day appeer'd, and oft before gaue audience,
As 'tis reported so

   Mece. Let Rome be thus inform'd

   Agri. Who queazie with his insolence already,
Will their good thoughts call from him

   Caesar. The people knowes it,
And haue now receiu'd his accusations

   Agri. Who does he accuse?
  Caesar. Caesar, and that hauing in Cicilie
Sextus Pompeius spoil'd, we had not rated him
His part o'th' Isle. Then does he say, he lent me
Some shipping vnrestor'd. Lastly, he frets
That Lepidus of the Triumpherate, should be depos'd,
And being that, we detaine all his Reuenue

   Agri. Sir, this should be answer'd

   Caesar. 'Tis done already, and the Messenger gone:
I haue told him Lepidus was growne too cruell,
That he his high Authority abus'd,
And did deserue his change: for what I haue conquer'd,
I grant him part: but then in his Armenia,
And other of his conquer'd Kingdoms, I demand the like
  Mec. Hee'l neuer yeeld to that

   Caes Nor must not then be yeelded to in this.
Enter Octauia with her Traine.

  Octa. Haile Caesar, and my L[ord]. haile most deere Caesar

   Caesar. That euer I should call thee Cast-away

   Octa. You haue not call'd me so, nor haue you cause

   Caes Why haue you stoln vpon vs thus? you come not
Like Caesars Sister, The wife of Anthony
Should haue an Army for an Vsher, and
The neighes of Horse to tell of her approach,
Long ere she did appeare. The trees by'th' way
Should haue borne men, and expectation fainted,
Longing for what it had not. Nay, the dust
Should haue ascended to the Roofe of Heauen,
Rais'd by your populous Troopes: But you are come
A Market-maid to Rome, and haue preuented
The ostentation of our loue; which left vnshewne,
Is often left vnlou'd: we should haue met you
By Sea, and Land, supplying euery Stage
With an augmented greeting

   Octa. Good my Lord,
To come thus was I not constrain'd, but did it
On my free-will. My Lord Marke Anthony,
Hearing that you prepar'd for Warre, acquainted
My greeued eare withall: whereon I begg'd
His pardon for returne

   Caes Which soone he granted,
Being an abstract 'tweene his Lust, and him

   Octa. Do not say so, my Lord

   Caes I haue eyes vpon him,
And his affaires come to me on the wind: wher is he now?
  Octa. My Lord, in Athens

   Caesar. No my most wronged Sister, Cleopatra
Hath nodded him to her. He hath giuen his Empire
Vp to a Whore, who now are leuying
The Kings o'th' earth for Warre. He hath assembled,
Bochus the King of Lybia, Archilaus
Of Cappadocia, Philadelphos King
Of Paphlagonia: the Thracian King Adullas,
King Manchus of Arabia, King of Pont,
Herod of Iewry, Mithridates King
Of Comageat, Polemen and Amintas,
The Kings of Mede, and Licoania,
With a more larger List of Scepters

   Octa. Aye me most wretched,
That haue my heart parted betwixt two Friends,
That does afflict each other

   Caes Welcom hither: your Letters did with-holde our breaking
forth
Till we perceiu'd both how you were wrong led,
And we in negligent danger: cheere your heart,
Be you not troubled with the time, which driues
O're your content, these strong necessities,
But let determin'd things to destinie
Hold vnbewayl'd their way. Welcome to Rome,
Nothing more deere to me: You are abus'd
Beyond the marke of thought: and the high Gods
To do you Iustice, makes his Ministers
Of vs, and those that loue you. Best of comfort,
And euer welcom to vs

   Agrip. Welcome Lady

   Mec. Welcome deere Madam,
Each heart in Rome does loue and pitty you,
Onely th' adulterous Anthony, most large
In his abhominations, turnes you off,
And giues his potent Regiment to a Trull
That noyses it against vs

   Octa. Is it so sir?
  Caes Most certaine: Sister welcome: pray you
Be euer knowne to patience. My deer'st Sister.

Exeunt.

Enter Cleopatra, and Enobarbus.

  Cleo. I will be euen with thee, doubt it not

   Eno. But why, why, why?
  Cleo. Thou hast forespoke my being in these warres,
And say'st it is not fit

   Eno. Well: is it, is it

   Cleo. If not, denounc'd against vs, why should not
we be there in person

   Enob. Well, I could reply: if wee should serue with
Horse and Mares together, the Horse were meerly lost:
the Mares would beare a Soldiour and his Horse

   Cleo. What is't you say?
  Enob. Your presence needs must puzle Anthony,
Take from his heart, take from his Braine, from's time,
What should not then be spar'd. He is already
Traduc'd for Leuity, and 'tis said in Rome,
That Photinus an Eunuch, and your Maides
Mannage this warre

   Cleo. Sinke Rome, and their tongues rot
That speake against vs. A Charge we beare i'th' Warre,
And as the president of my Kingdome will
Appeare there for a man. Speake not against it,
I will not stay behinde.
Enter Anthony and Camidias.

  Eno. Nay I haue done, here comes the Emperor

   Ant. Is it not strange Camidius,
That from Tarientum, and Brandusium,
He could so quickly cut the Ionian Sea,
And take in Troine. You haue heard on't (Sweet?)
  Cleo. Celerity is neuer more admir'd,
Then by the negligent

   Ant. A good rebuke,
Which might haue well becom'd the best of men
To taunt at slacknesse. Camidius, wee
Will fight with him by Sea

   Cleo. By Sea, what else?
  Cam. Why will my Lord, do so?
  Ant. For that he dares vs too't

   Enob. So hath my Lord, dar'd him to single fight

   Cam. I, and to wage this Battell at Pharsalia,
Where Caesar fought with Pompey. But these offers
Which serue not for his vantage, he shakes off,
And so should you

   Enob. Your Shippes are not well mann'd,
Your Marriners are Militers, Reapers, people
Ingrost by swift Impresse. In Caesars Fleete,
Are those, that often haue 'gainst Pompey fought,
Their shippes are yare, yours heauy: no disgrace
Shall fall you for refusing him at Sea,
Being prepar'd for Land

   Ant. By Sea, by Sea

   Eno. Most worthy Sir, you therein throw away
The absolute Soldiership you haue by Land,
Distract your Armie, which doth most consist
Of Warre-markt-footmen, leaue vnexecuted
Your owne renowned knowledge, quite forgoe
The way which promises assurance, and
Giue vp your selfe meerly to chance and hazard,
From firme Securitie

   Ant. Ile fight at Sea

   Cleo. I haue sixty Sailes, Caesar none better

   Ant. Our ouer-plus of shipping will we burne,
And with the rest full mann'd, from th' head of Action
Beate th' approaching Caesar. But if we faile,
We then can doo't at Land.
Enter a Messenger.

Thy Businesse?
  Mes. The Newes is true, my Lord, he is descried,
Caesar ha's taken Toryne

   Ant. Can he be there in person? 'Tis impossible
Strange, that his power should be. Camidius,
Our nineteene Legions thou shalt hold by Land,
And our twelue thousand Horse. Wee'l to our Ship,
Away my Thetis.
Enter a Soldiour.

How now worthy Souldier?
  Soul. Oh Noble Emperor, do not fight by Sea,
Trust not to rotten plankes: Do you misdoubt
This Sword, and these my Wounds; let th' Egyptians
And the Phoenicians go a ducking: wee
Haue vs'd to conquer standing on the earth,
And fighting foot to foot

   Ant. Well, well, away.

exit Ant. Cleo. & Enob

   Soul. By Hercules I thinke I am i'th' right

   Cam. Souldier thou art: but his whole action growes
Not in the power on't: so our Leaders leade,
And we are Womens mens

   Soul. You keepe by Land the Legions and the Horse
whole, do you not?
  Ven. Marcus Octauius, Marcus Iusteus,
Publicola, and Celius, are for Sea:
But we keepe whole by Land. This speede of Caesars
Carries beyond beleefe

   Soul. While he was yet in Rome,
His power went out in such distractions,
As beguilde all Spies

   Cam. Who's his Lieutenant, heare you?
  Soul. They say, one Towrus

   Cam. Well, I know the man.
Enter a Messenger.

  Mes. The Emperor cals Camidius

   Cam. With Newes the times with Labour,
And throwes forth each minute, some.

Exeunt.

Enter Caesar with his Army, marching.

  Caes Towrus?
  Tow. My Lord

   Caes Strike not by Land,
Keepe whole, prouoke not Battaile
Till we haue done at Sea. Do not exceede
The Prescript of this Scroule: Our fortune lyes
Vpon this iumpe.
Enter.

Enter Anthony, and Enobarbus.

  Ant. Set we our Squadrons on yond side o'th' Hill,
In eye of Caesars battaile, from which place
We may the number of the Ships behold,
And so proceed accordingly.
Enter.

Camidius Marcheth with his Land Army one way ouer the stage,
and Towrus
the Lieutenant of Caesar the other way: After their going in, is
heard the
noise of a Sea fight. Alarum. Enter Enobarbus and Scarus.

  Eno. Naught, naught, al naught, I can behold no longer:
Thantoniad, the Egyptian Admirall,
With all their sixty flye, and turne the Rudder:
To see't, mine eyes are blasted.
Enter Scarrus.

  Scar. Gods, & Goddesses, all the whol synod of them!
  Eno. What's thy passion

   Scar. The greater Cantle of the world, is lost
With very ignorance, we haue kist away
Kingdomes, and Prouinces

   Eno. How appeares the Fight?
  Scar. On our side, like the Token'd Pestilence,
Where death is sure. Yon ribaudred Nagge of Egypt,
(Whom Leprosie o're-take) i'th' midst o'th' fight,
When vantage like a payre of Twinnes appear'd
Both as the same, or rather ours the elder;
(The Breeze vpon her) like a Cow in Iune,
Hoists Sailes, and flyes

   Eno. That I beheld:
Mine eyes did sicken at the sight, and could not
Indure a further view

   Scar. She once being looft,
The Noble ruine of her Magicke, Anthony,
Claps on his Sea-wing, and (like a doting Mallard)
Leauing the Fight in heighth, flyes after her:
I neuer saw an Action of such shame;
Experience, Man-hood, Honor, ne're before,
Did violate so it selfe

   Enob. Alacke, alacke.
Enter Camidius

   Cam. Our Fortune on the Sea is out of breath,
And sinkes most lamentably. Had our Generall
Bin what he knew himselfe, it had gone well:
Oh his ha's giuen example for our flight,
Most grossely by his owne

   Enob. I, are you thereabouts? Why then goodnight
indeede

   Cam. Toward Peloponnesus are they fled

   Scar. 'Tis easie toot,
And there I will attend what further comes

   Camid. To Caesar will I render
My Legions and my Horse, sixe Kings alreadie
Shew me the way of yeelding

   Eno. Ile yet follow
The wounded chance of Anthony, though my reason
Sits in the winde against me.
Enter Anthony with Attendants.

  Ant. Hearke, the Land bids me tread no more vpon't,
It is asham'd to beare me. Friends, come hither,
I am so lated in the world, that I
Haue lost my way for euer. I haue a shippe,
Laden with Gold, take that, diuide it: flye,
And make your peace with Caesar

   Omnes. Fly? Not wee

   Ant. I haue fled my selfe, and haue instructed cowards
To runne, and shew their shoulders. Friends be gone,
I haue my selfe resolu'd vpon a course,
Which has no neede of you. Be gone,
My Treasure's in the Harbour. Take it: Oh,
I follow'd that I blush to looke vpon,
My very haires do mutiny: for the white
Reproue the browne for rashnesse, and they them
For feare, and doting. Friends be gone, you shall
Haue Letters from me to some Friends, that will
Sweepe your way for you. Pray you looke not sad,
Nor make replyes of loathnesse, take the hint
Which my dispaire proclaimes. Let them be left
Which leaues it selfe, to the Sea-side straight way;
I will possesse you of that ship and Treasure.
Leaue me, I pray a little: pray you now,
Nay do so: for indeede I haue lost command,
Therefore I pray you, Ile see you by and by.

Sits downe

Enter Cleopatra led by Charmian and Eros.

  Eros. Nay gentle Madam, to him, comfort him

   Iras. Do most deere Queene

   Char. Do, why, what else?
  Cleo. Let me sit downe: Oh Iuno

   Ant. No, no, no, no, no

   Eros. See you heere, Sir?
  Ant. Oh fie, fie, fie

   Char. Madam

   Iras. Madam, oh good Empresse

   Eros. Sir, sir

   Ant. Yes my Lord, yes; he at Philippi kept
His sword e'ne like a dancer, while I strooke
The leane and wrinkled Cassius, and 'twas I
That the mad Brutus ended: he alone
Dealt on Lieutenantry, and no practise had
In the braue squares of Warre: yet now: no matter

   Cleo. Ah stand by

   Eros. The Queene my Lord, the Queene

   Iras. Go to him, Madam, speake to him,
Hee's vnqualitied with very shame

   Cleo. Well then, sustaine me: Oh

   Eros. Most Noble Sir arise, the Queene approaches,
Her head's declin'd, and death will cease her, but
Your comfort makes the rescue

   Ant. I haue offended Reputation,
A most vnnoble sweruing

   Eros. Sir, the Queene

   Ant. Oh whether hast thou lead me Egypt, see
How I conuey my shame, out of thine eyes,
By looking backe what I haue left behinde
Stroy'd in dishonor

   Cleo. Oh my Lord, my Lord,
Forgiue my fearfull sayles, I little thought
You would haue followed

   Ant. Egypt, thou knew'st too well,
My heart was to thy Rudder tyed by'th' strings,
And thou should'st towe me after. O're my spirit
The full supremacie thou knew'st, and that
Thy becke, might from the bidding of the Gods
Command mee

   Cleo. Oh my pardon

   Ant. Now I must
To the young man send humble Treaties, dodge
And palter in the shifts of lownes, who
With halfe the bulke o'th' world plaid as I pleas'd,
Making, and marring Fortunes. You did know
How much you were my Conqueror, and that
My Sword, made weake by my affection, would
Obey it on all cause

   Cleo. Pardon, pardon

   Ant. Fall not a teare I say, one of them rates
All that is wonne and lost: Giue me a kisse,
Euen this repayes me.
We sent our Schoolemaster, is a come backe?
Loue I am full of Lead: some Wine
Within there, and our Viands: Fortune knowes,
We scorne her most, when most she offers blowes.

Exeunt.

Enter Caesar, Agrippa, and Dollabello, with others.

  Caes Let him appeare that's come from Anthony.
Know you him

   Dolla. Caesar, 'tis his Schoolemaster,
An argument that he is pluckt, when hither
He sends so poore a Pinnion of his Wing,
Which had superfluous Kings for Messengers,
Not many Moones gone by.
Enter Ambassador from Anthony.

  Caesar. Approach, and speake

   Amb. Such as I am, I come from Anthony:
I was of late as petty to his ends,
As is the Morne-dew on the Mertle leafe
To his grand Sea

   Caes Bee't so, declare thine office

   Amb. Lord of his Fortunes he salutes thee, and
Requires to liue in Egypt, which not granted
He Lessons his Requests, and to thee sues
To let him breath betweene the Heauens and Earth
A priuate man in Athens: this for him.
Next, Cleopatra does confesse thy Greatnesse,
Submits her to thy might, and of thee craues
The Circle of the Ptolomies for her heyres,
Now hazarded to thy Grace

   Caes For Anthony,
I haue no eares to his request. The Queene,
Of Audience, nor Desire shall faile, so shee
From Egypt driue her all-disgraced Friend,
Or take his life there. This if shee performe,
She shall not sue vnheard. So to them both

   Amb. Fortune pursue thee

   Caes Bring him through the Bands:
To try thy Eloquence, now 'tis time, dispatch,
From Anthony winne Cleopatra, promise
And in our Name, what she requires, adde more
From thine inuention, offers. Women are not
In their best Fortunes strong; but want will periure
The ne're touch'd Vestall. Try thy cunning Thidias,
Make thine owne Edict for thy paines, which we
Will answer as a Law

   Thid. Caesar. I go

   Caesar. Obserue how Anthony becomes his flaw,
And what thou think'st his very action speakes
In euery power that mooues

   Thid. Caesar, I shall.

Exeunt.

Enter Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, & Iras.

  Cleo. What shall we do, Enobarbus?
  Eno. Thinke, and dye

   Cleo. Is Anthony, or we in fault for this?
  Eno. Anthony onely, that would make his will
Lord of his Reason. What though you fled,
From that great face of Warre, whose seuerall ranges
Frighted each other? Why should he follow?
The itch of his Affection should not then
Haue nickt his Captain-ship, at such a point,
When halfe to halfe the world oppos'd, he being
The meered question? 'Twas a shame no lesse
Then was his losse, to course your flying Flagges,
And leaue his Nauy gazing

   Cleo. Prythee peace.
Enter the Ambassador, with Anthony.

  Ant. Is that his answer?
  Amb. I my Lord

   Ant. The Queene shall then haue courtesie,
So she will yeeld vs vp

   Am. He sayes so

   Antho. Let her know't. To the Boy Caesar send this
grizled head, and he will fill thy wishes to the brimme,
With Principalities

   Cleo. That head my Lord?
  Ant. To him againe, tell him he weares the Rose
Of youth vpon him: from which, the world should note
Something particular: His Coine, Ships, Legions,
May be a Cowards, whose Ministers would preuaile
Vnder the seruice of a Childe, as soone
As i'th' Command of Caesar. I dare him therefore
To lay his gay Comparisons a-part,
And answer me declin'd, Sword against Sword,
Our selues alone: Ile write it: Follow me

   Eno. Yes like enough: hye battel'd Caesar will
Vnstate his happinesse, and be Stag'd to'th' shew
Against a Sworder. I see mens Iudgements are
A parcell of their Fortunes, and things outward
Do draw the inward quality after them
To suffer all alike, that he should dreame,
Knowing all measures, the full Caesar will
Answer his emptinesse; Caesar thou hast subdu'de
His iudgement too.
Enter a Seruant.

  Ser. A Messenger from Caesar

   Cleo. What no more Ceremony? See my Women,
Against the blowne Rose may they stop their nose,
That kneel'd vnto the Buds. Admit him sir

   Eno. Mine honesty, and I, beginne to square,
The Loyalty well held to Fooles, does make
Our Faith meere folly: yet he that can endure
To follow with Allegeance a falne Lord,
Does conquer him that did his Master conquer,
And earnes a place i'th' Story.
Enter Thidias.

  Cleo. Caesars will

   Thid. Heare it apart

   Cleo. None but Friends: say boldly

   Thid. So haply are they Friends to Anthony

   Enob. He needs as many (Sir) as Caesar ha's,
Or needs not vs. If Caesar please, our Master
Will leape to be his Friend: For vs you know,
Whose he is, we are, and that is Caesars

   Thid. So. Thus then thou most renown'd, Caesar intreats,
Not to consider in what case thou stand'st
Further then he is Caesars

   Cleo. Go on, right Royall

   Thid. He knowes that you embrace not Anthony
As you did loue, but as you feared him

   Cleo. Oh

   Thid. The scarre's vpon your Honor, therefore he
Does pitty, as constrained blemishes,
Not as deserued

   Cleo. He is a God,
And knowes what is most right. Mine Honour
Was not yeelded, but conquer'd meerely

   Eno. To be sure of that, I will aske Anthony.
Sir, sir, thou art so leakie
That we must leaue thee to thy sinking, for
Thy deerest quit thee.

Exit Enob.

  Thid. Shall I say to Caesar,
What you require of him: for he partly begges
To be desir'd to giue. It much would please him,
That of his Fortunes you should make a staffe
To leane vpon. But it would warme his spirits
To heare from me you had left Anthony,
And put your selfe vnder his shrowd, the vniuersal Landlord

   Cleo. What's your name?
  Thid. My name is Thidias

   Cleo. Most kinde Messenger,
Say to great Caesar this in disputation,
I kisse his conqu'ring hand: Tell him, I am prompt
To lay my Crowne at's feete, and there to kneele.
Tell him, from his all-obeying breath, I heare
The doome of Egypt

   Thid. 'Tis your Noblest course:
Wisedome and Fortune combatting together,
If that the former dare but what it can,
No chance may shake it. Giue me grace to lay
My dutie on your hand

   Cleo. Your Caesars Father oft,
(When he hath mus'd of taking kingdomes in)
Bestow'd his lips on that vnworthy place,
As it rain'd kisses.
Enter Anthony and Enobarbus.

  Ant. Fauours? By Ioue that thunders. What art thou Fellow?
  Thid. One that but performes
The bidding of the fullest man, and worthiest
To haue command obey'd

   Eno. You will be whipt

   Ant. Approch there: ah you Kite. Now Gods & diuels
Authority melts from me of late. When I cried hoa,
Like Boyes vnto a musse, Kings would start forth,
And cry, your will. Haue you no eares?
I am Anthony yet. Take hence this Iack, and whip him.
Enter a Seruant.

  Eno. 'Tis better playing with a Lions whelpe,
Then with an old one dying

   Ant. Moone and Starres,
Whip him: wer't twenty of the greatest Tributaries
That do acknowledge Caesar, should I finde them
So sawcy with the hand of she heere, what's her name
Since she was Cleopatra? Whip him Fellowes,
Till like a Boy you see him crindge his face,
And whine aloud for mercy. Take him hence

   Thid. Marke Anthony

   Ant. Tugge him away: being whipt
Bring him againe, the Iacke of Caesars shall
Beare vs an arrant to him.

Exeunt. with Thidius.

You were halfe blasted ere I knew you: Ha?
Haue I my pillow left vnprest in Rome,
Forborne the getting of a lawfull Race,
And by a Iem of women, to be abus'd
By one that lookes on Feeders?
  Cleo. Good my Lord

   Ant. You haue beene a boggeler euer,
But when we in our viciousnesse grow hard
(Oh misery on't) the wise Gods seele our eyes
In our owne filth, drop our cleare iudgements, make vs
Adore our errors, laugh at's while we strut
To our confusion

   Cleo. Oh, is't come to this?
  Ant. I found you as a Morsell, cold vpon
Dead Caesars Trencher: Nay, you were a Fragment
Of Gneius Pompeyes, besides what hotter houres
Vnregistred in vulgar Fame, you haue
Luxuriously pickt out. For I am sure,
Though you can guesse what Temperance should be,
You know not what it is

   Cleo. Wherefore is this?
  Ant. To let a Fellow that will take rewards,
And say, God quit you, be familiar with
My play-fellow, your hand; this Kingly Seale,
And plighter of high hearts. O that I were
Vpon the hill of Basan, to out-roare
The horned Heard, for I haue sauage cause,
And to proclaime it ciuilly, were like
A halter'd necke, which do's the Hangman thanke,
For being yare about him. Is he whipt?
Enter a Seruant with Thidias.

  Ser. Soundly, my Lord

   Ant. Cried he? and begg'd a Pardon?
  Ser. He did aske fauour

   Ant. If that thy Father liue, let him repent
Thou was't not made his daughter, and be thou sorrie
To follow Caesar in his Triumph, since
Thou hast bin whipt. For following him, henceforth
The white hand of a Lady Feauer thee,
Shake thou to looke on't. Get thee backe to Caesar,
Tell him thy entertainment: looke thou say
He makes me angry with him. For he seemes
Proud and disdainfull, harping on what I am,
Not what he knew I was. He makes me angry,
And at this time most easie 'tis to doo't:
When my good Starres, that were my former guides
Haue empty left their Orbes, and shot their Fires
Into th' Abisme of hell. If he mislike,
My speech, and what is done, tell him he has
Hiparchus, my enfranched Bondman, whom
He may at pleasure whip, or hang, or torture,
As he shall like to quit me. Vrge it thou:
Hence with thy stripes, be gone.

Exit Thid.

  Cleo. Haue you done yet?
  Ant. Alacke our Terrene Moone is now Eclipst,
And it portends alone the fall of Anthony

   Cleo. I must stay his time?
  Ant. To flatter Caesar, would you mingle eyes
With one that tyes his points

   Cleo. Not know me yet?
  Ant. Cold-hearted toward me?
  Cleo. Ah (Deere) if I be so,
From my cold heart let Heauen ingender haile,
And poyson it in the sourse, and the first stone
Drop in my necke: as it determines so
Dissolue my life, the next Caesarian smile,
Till by degrees the memory of my wombe,
Together with my braue Egyptians all,
By the discandering of this pelleted storme,
Lye grauelesse, till the Flies and Gnats of Nyle
Haue buried them for prey

   Ant. I am satisfied:
Caesar sets downe in Alexandria, where
I will oppose his Fate. Our force by Land,
Hath Nobly held, our seuer'd Nauie too
Haue knit againe, and Fleete, threatning most Sea-like.
Where hast thou bin my heart? Dost thou heare Lady?
If from the Field I shall returne once more
To kisse these Lips, I will appeare in Blood,
I, and my Sword, will earne our Chronicle,
There's hope in't yet

   Cleo. That's my braue Lord

   Ant. I will be trebble-sinewed, hearted, breath'd,
And fight maliciously: for when mine houres
Were nice and lucky, men did ransome liues
Of me for iests: But now, Ile set my teeth,
And send to darkenesse all that stop me. Come,
Let's haue one other gawdy night: Call to me
All my sad Captaines, fill our Bowles once more:
Let's mocke the midnight Bell

   Cleo. It is my Birth-day,
I had thought t'haue held it poore. But since my Lord
Is Anthony againe, I will be Cleopatra

   Ant. We will yet do well

   Cleo. Call all his Noble Captaines to my Lord

   Ant. Do so, wee'l speake to them,
And to night Ile force
The Wine peepe through their scarres.
Come on (my Queene)
There's sap in't yet. The next time I do fight
Ile make death loue me: for I will contend
Euen with his pestilent Sythe.

Exeunt.

  Eno. Now hee'l out-stare the Lightning, to be furious
Is to be frighted out of feare, and in that moode
The Doue will pecke the Estridge; and I see still
A diminution in our Captaines braine,
Restores his heart; when valour prayes in reason,
It eates the Sword it fights with: I will seeke
Some way to leaue him.

Exeunt.

Enter Caesar, Agrippa, & Mecenas with his Army, Caesar reading
a Letter.

  Caes He calles me Boy, and chides as he had power
To beate me out of Egypt. My Messenger
He hath whipt with Rods, dares me to personal Combat.
Caesar to Anthony: let the old Ruffian know,
I haue many other wayes to dye: meane time
Laugh at his Challenge

   Mece. Caesar must thinke,
When one so great begins to rage, hee's hunted
Euen to falling. Giue him no breath, but now
Make boote of his distraction: Neuer anger
Made good guard for it selfe

   Caes Let our best heads know,
That to morrow, the last of many Battailes
We meane to fight. Within our Files there are,
Of those that seru'd Marke Anthony but late,
Enough to fetch him in. See it done,
And Feast the Army, we haue store to doo't,
And they haue earn'd the waste. Poore Anthony.

Exeunt.

Enter Anthony, Cleopatra, Enobarbus, Charmian, Iras, Alexas,
with others.

  Ant. He will not fight with me, Domitian?
  Eno. No?
  Ant. Why should he not?
  Eno. He thinks, being twenty times of better fortune,
He is twenty men to one

   Ant. To morrow Soldier,
By Sea and Land Ile fight: or I will liue,
Or bathe my dying Honor in the blood
Shall make it liue againe. Woo't thou fight well

   Eno. Ile strike, and cry, Take all

   Ant. Well said, come on:
Call forth my Houshold Seruants, lets to night
Enter 3 or 4 Seruitors.

Be bounteous at our Meale. Giue me thy hand,
Thou hast bin rightly honest, so hast thou,
Thou, and thou, and thou: you haue seru'd me well,
And Kings haue beene your fellowes

   Cleo. What meanes this?
  Eno. 'Tis one of those odde tricks which sorow shoots
Out of the minde

   Ant. And thou art honest too:
I wish I could be made so many men,
And all of you clapt vp together, in
An Anthony: that I might do you seruice,
So good as you haue done

   Omnes. The Gods forbid

   Ant. Well, my good Fellowes, wait on me to night:
Scant not my Cups, and make as much of me,
As when mine Empire was your Fellow too,
And suffer'd my command

   Cleo. What does he meane?
  Eno. To make his Followers weepe

   Ant. Tend me to night;
May be, it is the period of your duty,
Haply you shall not see me more, or if,
A mangled shadow. Perchance to morrow,
You'l serue another Master. I looke on you,
As one that takes his leaue. Mine honest Friends,
I turne you not away, but like a Master
Married to your good seruice, stay till death:
Tend me to night two houres, I aske no more,
And the Gods yeeld you for't

   Eno. What meane you (Sir)
To giue them this discomfort? Looke they weepe,
And I an Asse, am Onyon-ey'd; for shame,
Transforme vs not to women

   Ant. Ho, ho, ho:
Now the Witch take me, if I meant it thus.
Grace grow where those drops fall (my hearty Friends)
You take me in too dolorous a sense,
For I spake to you for your comfort, did desire you
To burne this night with Torches: Know (my hearts)
I hope well of to morrow, and will leade you,
Where rather Ile expect victorious life,
Then death, and Honor. Let's to Supper, come,
And drowne consideration.

Exeunt.

Enter a Company of Soldiours.

  1.Sol. Brother, goodnight: to morrow is the day

   2.Sol. It will determine one way: Fare you well.
Heard you of nothing strange about the streets

   1 Nothing: what newes?
  2 Belike 'tis but a Rumour, good night to you

   1 Well sir, good night.

They meete other Soldiers.

  2 Souldiers, haue carefull Watch

   1 And you: Goodnight, goodnight.

They place themselues in euery corner of the Stage.

  2 Heere we: and if to morrow
Our Nauie thriue, I haue an absolute hope
Our Landmen will stand vp

   1 'Tis a braue Army, and full of purpose.

Musicke of the Hoboyes is vnder the Stage.

  2 Peace, what noise?
  1 List, list

   2 Hearke

   1 Musicke i'th' Ayre

   3 Vnder the earth

   4 It signes well, do's it not?
  3 No

   1 Peace I say: What should this meane?
  2 'Tis the God Hercules, whom Anthony loued,
Now leaues him

   1 Walke, let's see if other Watchmen
Do heare what we do?
  2 How now Maisters?

Speak together.

  Omnes. How now? how now? do you heare this?
  1 I, is't not strange?
  3 Do you heare Masters? Do you heare?
  1 Follow the noyse so farre as we haue quarter.
Let's see how it will giue off

   Omnes. Content: 'Tis strange.

Exeunt.

Enter Anthony and Cleopatra, with others.

  Ant. Eros, mine Armour Eros

   Cleo. Sleepe a little

   Ant. No my Chucke. Eros, come mine Armor Eros.
Enter Eros.

Come good Fellow, put thine Iron on,
If Fortune be not ours to day, it is
Because we braue her. Come

   Cleo. Nay, Ile helpe too, Anthony.
What's this for? Ah let be, let be, thou art
The Armourer of my heart: False, false: This, this,
Sooth-law Ile helpe: Thus it must bee

   Ant. Well, well, we shall thriue now.
Seest thou my good Fellow. Go, put on thy defences

   Eros. Briefely Sir

   Cleo. Is not this buckled well?
  Ant. Rarely, rarely:
He that vnbuckles this, till we do please
To daft for our Repose, shall heare a storme.
Thou fumblest Eros, and my Queenes a Squire
More tight at this, then thou: Dispatch. O Loue,
That thou couldst see my Warres to day, and knew'st
The Royall Occupation, thou should'st see
A Workeman in't.
Enter an Armed Soldier.

Good morrow to thee, welcome,
Thou look'st like him that knowes a warlike Charge:
To businesse that we loue, we rise betime,
And go too't with delight

   Soul. A thousand Sir, early though't be, haue on their
Riueted trim, and at the Port expect you.

Showt. Trumpets Flourish. Enter Captaines, and Souldiers.

  Alex. The Morne is faire: Good morrow Generall

   All. Good morrow Generall

   Ant. 'Tis well blowne Lads.
This Morning, like the spirit of a youth
That meanes to be of note, begins betimes.
So, so: Come giue me that, this way, well-sed.
Fare thee well Dame, what ere becomes of me,
This is a Soldiers kisse: rebukeable,
And worthy shamefull checke it were, to stand
On more Mechanicke Complement, Ile leaue thee.
Now like a man of Steele, you that will fight,
Follow me close, Ile bring you too't: Adieu.

Exeunt.

  Char. Please you retyre to your Chamber?
  Cleo. Lead me:
He goes forth gallantly: That he and Caesar might
Determine this great Warre in single fight;
Then Anthony; but now. Well on.

Exeunt.

Trumpets sound. Enter Anthony, and Eros.

  Eros. The Gods make this a happy day to Anthony

   Ant. Would thou, & those thy scars had once preuaild
To make me fight at Land

   Eros. Had'st thou done so,
The Kings that haue reuolted, and the Soldier
That has this morning left thee, would haue still
Followed thy heeles

   Ant. Whose gone this morning?
  Eros. Who? one euer neere thee, call for Enobarbus,
He shall not heare thee, or from Caesars Campe,
Say I am none of thine

   Ant. What sayest thou?
  Sold. Sir he is with Caesar

   Eros. Sir, his Chests and Treasure he has not with him

   Ant. Is he gone?
  Sol. Most certaine

   Ant. Go Eros, send his Treasure after, do it,
Detaine no iot I charge thee: write to him,
(I will subscribe) gentle adieu's, and greetings;
Say, that I wish he neuer finde more cause
To change a Master. Oh my Fortunes haue
Corrupted honest men. Dispatch Enobarbus.

Exit

Flourish. Enter Agrippa, Caesar, with Enobarbus, and Dollabella.

  Caes Go forth Agrippa, and begin the fight:
Our will is Anthony be tooke aliue:
Make it so knowne

   Agrip. Caesar, I shall

   Caesar. The time of vniuersall peace is neere:
Proue this a prosp'rous day, the three nook'd world
Shall beare the Oliue freely.

Enter a Messenger.

  Mes. Anthony is come into the Field

   Caes Go charge Agrippa,
Plant those that haue reuolted in the Vant,
That Anthony may seeme to spend his Fury
Vpon himselfe.

Exeunt.

  Enob. Alexas did reuolt, and went to Iewry on
Affaires of Anthony, there did disswade
Great Herod to incline himselfe to Caesar,
And leaue his Master Anthony. For this paines,
Caesar hath hang'd him: Camindius and the rest
That fell away, haue entertainment, but
No honourable trust: I haue done ill,
Of which I do accuse my selfe so sorely,
That I will ioy no more.

Enter a Soldier of Caesars.

  Sol. Enobarbus, Anthony
Hath after thee sent all thy Treasure, with
His Bounty ouer-plus. The Messenger
Came on my guard, and at thy Tent is now
Vnloading of his Mules

   Eno. I giue it you

   Sol. Mocke not Enobarbus,
I tell you true: Best you saf't the bringer
Out of the hoast, I must attend mine Office,
Or would haue done't my selfe. Your Emperor
Continues still a Ioue.

Exit

  Enob. I am alone the Villaine of the earth,
And feele I am so most. Oh Anthony,
Thou Mine of Bounty, how would'st thou haue payed
My better seruice, when my turpitude
Thou dost so Crowne with Gold. This blowes my hart,
If swift thought breake it not: a swifter meane
Shall out-strike thought, but thought will doo't. I feele
I fight against thee: No I will go seeke
Some Ditch, wherein to dye: the foul'st best fits
My latter part of life.

Enter.

Alarum, Drummes and Trumpets. Enter Agrippa.

  Agrip. Retire, we haue engag'd our selues too farre:
Caesar himselfe ha's worke, and our oppression
Exceeds what we expected.

Enter.

Alarums. Enter Anthony, and Scarrus wounded.

  Scar. O my braue Emperor, this is fought indeed,
Had we done so at first, we had drouen them home
With clowts about their heads.

Far off.

  Ant. Thou bleed'st apace

   Scar. I had a wound heere that was like a T,
But now 'tis made an H

   Ant. They do retyre

   Scar. Wee'l beat 'em into Bench-holes, I haue yet
Roome for six scotches more

Enter Eros.

  Eros. They are beaten Sir, and our aduantage serues
For a faire victory

   Scar. Let vs score their backes,
And snatch 'em vp, as we take Hares behinde,
'Tis sport to maul a Runner

   Ant. I will reward thee
Once for thy sprightly comfort, and ten-fold
For thy good valour. Come thee on

   Scar. Ile halt after.

Exeunt.

Alarum. Enter Anthony againe in a March. Scarrus, with others.

  Ant. We haue beate him to his Campe: Runne one
Before, & let the Queen know of our guests: to morrow
Before the Sun shall see's, wee'l spill the blood
That ha's to day escap'd. I thanke you all,
For doughty handed are you, and haue fought
Not as you seru'd the Cause, but as't had beene
Each mans like mine: you haue shewne all Hectors.
Enter the Citty, clip your Wiues, your Friends,
Tell them your feats, whil'st they with ioyfull teares
Wash the congealement from your wounds, and kisse
The Honour'd-gashes whole.
Enter Cleopatra.

Giue me thy hand,
To this great Faiery, Ile commend thy acts,
Make her thankes blesse thee. Oh thou day o'th' world,
Chaine mine arm'd necke, leape thou, Attyre and all
Through proofe of Harnesse to my heart, and there
Ride on the pants triumphing

   Cleo. Lord of Lords.
Oh infinite Vertue, comm'st thou smiling from
The worlds great snare vncaught

   Ant. Mine Nightingale,
We haue beate them to their Beds.
What Gyrle, though gray
Do somthing mingle with our yonger brown, yet ha we
A Braine that nourishes our Nerues, and can
Get gole for gole of youth. Behold this man,
Commend vnto his Lippes thy fauouring hand,
Kisse it my Warriour: He hath fought to day,
As if a God in hate of Mankinde, had
Destroyed in such a shape

   Cleo. Ile giue thee Friend
An Armour all of Gold: it was a Kings

   Ant. He has deseru'd it, were it Carbunkled
Like holy Phoebus Carre. Giue me thy hand,
Through Alexandria make a iolly March,

Beare our hackt Targets, like the men that owe them.
Had our great Pallace the capacity
To Campe this hoast, we all would sup together,
And drinke Carowses to the next dayes Fate
Which promises Royall perill, Trumpetters
With brazen dinne blast you the Citties eare,
Make mingle with our ratling Tabourines,
That heauen and earth may strike their sounds together,
Applauding our approach.

Exeunt.

Enter a Centerie, and his Company, Enobarbus followes.

  Cent. If we be not releeu'd within this houre,
We must returne to'th' Court of Guard: the night
Is shiny, and they say, we shall embattaile
By'th' second houre i'th' Morne

   1.Watch. This last day was a shrew'd one too's

   Enob. Oh beare me witnesse night

   2 What man is this?
  1 Stand close, and list him

   Enob. Be witnesse to me (O thou blessed Moone)
When men reuolted shall vpon Record
Beare hatefull memory: poore Enobarbus did
Before thy face repent

   Cent. Enobarbus?
  2 Peace: Hearke further

   Enob. Oh Soueraigne Mistris of true Melancholly,
The poysonous dampe of night dispunge vpon me,
That Life, a very Rebell to my will,
May hang no longer on me. Throw my heart
Against the flint and hardnesse of my fault,
Which being dried with greefe, will breake to powder,
And finish all foule thoughts. Oh Anthony,
Nobler then my reuolt is Infamous,
Forgiue me in thine owne particular,
But let the world ranke me in Register
A Master leauer, and a fugitiue:
Oh Anthony! Oh Anthony!
  1 Let's speake to him

   Cent. Let's heare him, for the things he speakes
May concerne Caesar

   2 Let's do so; but he sleepes

   Cent. Swoonds rather, for so bad a Prayer as his
Was neuer yet for sleepe

   1 Go we to him

   2 Awake sir, awake, speake to vs

   1 Heare you sir?
  Cent. The hand of death hath raught him.

Drummes afarre off.

Hearke the Drummes demurely wake the sleepers:
Let vs beare him to'th' Court of Guard: he is of note:
Our houre is fully out

   2 Come on then, he may recouer yet.

Exeunt.

Enter Anthony and Scarrus, with their Army.

  Ant. Their preparation is to day by Sea,
We please them not by Land

   Scar. For both, my Lord

   Ant. I would they'ld fight i'th' Fire, or i'th' Ayre,
Wee'ld fight there too. But this it is, our Foote
Vpon the hilles adioyning to the Citty
Shall stay with vs. Order for Sea is giuen,
They haue put forth the Hauen:
Where their appointment we may best discouer,
And looke on their endeuour.

Exeunt.

Enter Caesar, and his Army.

  Caes But being charg'd, we will be still by Land,
Which as I tak't we shall, for his best force
Is forth to Man his Gallies. To the Vales,
And hold our best aduantage.

Exeunt.

Alarum afarre off, as at a Sea-fight. Enter Anthony, and Scarrus.

  Ant. Yet they are not ioyn'd:
Where yon'd Pine does stand, I shall discouer all.
Ile bring thee word straight, how 'tis like to go.
Enter.

  Scar. Swallowes haue built
In Cleopatra's Sailes their nests. The Auguries
Say, they know not, they cannot tell, looke grimly,
And dare not speake their knowledge. Anthony,
Is valiant, and deiected, and by starts
His fretted Fortunes giue him hope and feare
Of what he has, and has not.
Enter Anthony.

  Ant. All is lost:
This fowle Egyptian hath betrayed me:
My Fleete hath yeelded to the Foe, and yonder
They cast their Caps vp, and Carowse together
Like Friends long lost. Triple-turn'd Whore, 'tis thou
Hast sold me to this Nouice, and my heart
Makes onely Warres on thee. Bid them all flye:
For when I am reueng'd vpon my Charme,
I haue done all. Bid them all flye, be gone.
Oh Sunne, thy vprise shall I see no more,
Fortune, and Anthony part heere, euen heere
Do we shake hands? All come to this? The hearts
That pannelled me at heeles, to whom I gaue
Their wishes, do dis-Candie, melt their sweets
On blossoming Caesar: And this Pine is barkt,
That ouer-top'd them all. Betray'd I am.
Oh this false Soule of Egypt! this graue Charme,
Whose eye beck'd forth my Wars, & cal'd them home:
Whose Bosome was my Crownet, my chiefe end,
Like a right Gypsie, hath at fast and loose
Beguil'd me, to the very heart of losse.
What Eros, Eros?
Enter Cleopatra.

Ah, thou Spell! Auaunt

   Cleo. Why is my Lord enrag'd against his Loue?
  Ant. Vanish, or I shall giue thee thy deseruing,
And blemish Caesars Triumph. Let him take thee,
And hoist thee vp to the shouting Plebeians,
Follow his Chariot, like the greatest spot
Of all thy Sex. Most Monster-like be shewne
For poor'st Diminitiues, for Dolts, and let
Patient Octauia, plough thy visage vp
With her prepared nailes.

exit Cleopatra.

'Tis well th'art gone,
If it be well to liue. But better 'twere
Thou fell'st into my furie, for one death
Might haue preuented many. Eros, hoa!
The shirt of Nessus is vpon me, teach me
Alcides, thou mine Ancestor, thy rage.
Let me lodge Licas on the hornes o'th' Moone,
And with those hands that graspt the heauiest Club,
Subdue my worthiest selfe: The Witch shall die,
To the young Roman Boy she hath sold me, and I fall
Vnder this plot: She dyes for't. Eros hoa?
Enter.

Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, Mardian.

  Cleo. Helpe me my women: Oh hee's more mad
Then Telamon for his Shield, the Boare of Thessaly
Was neuer so imbost

   Char. To'th' Monument, there locke your selfe,
And send him word you are dead:
The Soule and Body riue not more in parting,
Then greatnesse going off

   Cleo. To'th' Monument:
Mardian, go tell him I haue slaine my selfe:
Say, that the last I spoke was Anthony,
And word it (prythee) pitteously. Hence Mardian,
And bring me how he takes my death to'th' Monument.

Exeunt.

Enter Anthony, and Eros.

  Ant. Eros, thou yet behold'st me?
  Eros. I Noble Lord

   Ant. Sometime we see a clowd that's Dragonish,
A vapour sometime, like a Beare, or Lyon,
A toward Cittadell, a pendant Rocke,
A forked Mountaine, or blew Promontorie
With Trees vpon't, that nodde vnto the world,
And mocke our eyes with Ayre.
Thou hast seene these Signes,
They are blacke Vespers Pageants

   Eros. I my Lord

   Ant. That which is now a Horse, euen with a thoght
the Racke dislimes, and makes it indistinct
As water is in water

   Eros. It does my Lord

   Ant. My good Knaue Eros, now thy Captaine is
Euen such a body: Heere I am Anthony,
Yet cannot hold this visible shape (my Knaue)
I made these warres for Egypt, and the Queene,
Whose heart I thought I had, for she had mine:
Which whil'st it was mine, had annext vntoo't
A Million moe, (now lost:) shee Eros has
Packt Cards with Caesars, and false plaid my Glory
Vnto an Enemies triumph.
Nay, weepe not gentle Eros, there is left vs
Our selues to end our selues.
Enter Mardian.

Oh thy vilde Lady, she has rob'd me of my Sword

   Mar. No Anthony,
My Mistris lou'd thee, and her Fortunes mingled
with thine intirely

   Ant. Hence sawcy Eunuch peace, she hath betraid me,
And shall dye the death

   Mar. Death of one person, can be paide but once,
And that she ha's discharg'd. What thou would'st do
Is done vnto thy hand: the last she spake
Was Anthony, most Noble Anthony.
Then in the midd'st a tearing grone did breake
The name of Anthony: it was diuided
Betweene her heart, and lips: she tendred life
Thy name so buried in her

   Ant. Dead then?
  Mar. Dead

   Ant. Vnarme Eros, the long dayes taske is done,
And we must sleepe: That thou depart'st hence safe
Does pay thy labour richly: Go.

exit Mardian.

Off, plucke off,
The seuen-fold shield of Aiax cannot keepe
The battery from my heart. Oh cleaue my sides.
Heart, once be stronger then thy Continent,
Cracke thy fraile Case. Apace Eros, apace;
No more a Soldier: bruised peeces go,
You haue bin Nobly borne. From me awhile.

exit Eros

I will o're-take thee Cleopatra, and
Weepe for my pardon. So it must be, for now
All length is Torture: since the Torch is out,
Lye downe and stray no farther. Now all labour
Marres what it does: yea, very force entangles
It selfe with strength: Seale then and all is done.
Eros? I come my Queene. Eros? Stay for me,
Where Soules do couch on Flowers, wee'l hand in hand,
And with our sprightly Port make the Ghostes gaze:
Dido, and her Aeneas shall want Troopes,
And all the haunt be ours. Come Eros, Eros.
Enter Eros.

  Eros. What would my Lord?
  Ant. Since Cleopatra dyed,
I haue liu'd in such dishonour, that the Gods
Detest my basenesse. I, that with my Sword,
Quarter'd the World, and o're greene Neptunes backe
With Ships, made Cities; condemne my selfe, to lacke
The Courage of a Woman, lesse Noble minde
Then she which by her death, our Caesar telles
I am Conqueror of my selfe. Thou art sworne Eros,
That when the exigent should come, which now
Is come indeed: When I should see behinde me
Th' ineuitable prosecution of disgrace and horror,
That on my command, thou then would'st kill me.
Doo't, the time is come: Thou strik'st not me,
'Tis Caesar thou defeat'st. Put colour in thy Cheeke

   Eros. The Gods with-hold me,
Shall I do that which all the Parthian Darts,
(Though Enemy) lost ayme, and could not

   Ant. Eros,
Would'st thou be window'd in great Rome, and see
Thy Master thus with pleacht Armes, bending downe
His corrigible necke, his face subdu'de
To penetratiue shame; whil'st the wheel'd seate
Of Fortunate Caesar drawne before him, branded
His Basenesse that ensued

   Eros. I would not see't

   Ant. Come then: for with a wound I must be cur'd.
Draw that thy honest Sword, which thou hast worne
Most vsefull for thy Country

   Eros. Oh sir, pardon me

   Ant. When I did make thee free, swor'st y not then
To do this when I bad thee? Do it at once,
Or thy precedent Seruices are all
But accidents vnpurpos'd. Draw, and come

   Eros. Turne from me then that Noble countenance,
Wherein the worship of the whole world lyes

   Ant. Loe thee

   Eros. My sword is drawne

   Ant. Then let it do at once
The thing why thou hast drawne it

   Eros. My deere Master,
My Captaine, and my Emperor. Let me say
Before I strike this bloody stroke, Farwell

   Ant. 'Tis said man, and farewell

   Eros. Farewell great Chiefe. Shall I strike now?
  Ant. Now Eros.

Killes himselfe.

  Eros. Why there then:
Thus I do escape the sorrow of Anthonies death

   Ant. Thrice-Nobler then my selfe,
Thou teachest me: Oh valiant Eros, what
I should, and thou could'st not, my Queene and Eros
Haue by their braue instruction got vpon me
A Noblenesse in Record. But I will bee
A Bride-groome in my death, and run intoo't
As to a Louers bed. Come then, and Eros,
Thy Master dies thy Scholler; to do thus
I learnt of thee. How, not dead? Not dead?
The Guard, how? Oh dispatch me.
Enter a Guard.

  1.Guard. What's the noise?
  Ant. I haue done my worke ill Friends:
Oh make an end of what I haue begun

   2 The Starre is falne

   1 And time is at his Period

   All. Alas, and woe

   Ant. Let him that loues me, strike me dead

   1 Not I

   2 Nor I

   3 Nor any one.

Exeunt.

  Decretus. Thy death and fortunes bid thy folowers fly
This sword but shewne to Caesar with this tydings,
Shall enter me with him.
Enter Diomedes.

  Dio. Where's Anthony?
  Decre. There Diomed there

   Diom. Liues he: wilt thou not answer man?
  Ant. Art thou there Diomed?
Draw thy sword, and giue mee,
Suffising strokes for death

   Diom. Most absolute Lord:
My Mistris Cleopatra sent me to thee

   Ant. When did shee send thee?
  Diom. Now my Lord

   Anth. Where is she?
  Diom. Lockt in her Monument: she had a Prophesying feare
Of what hath come to passe: for when she saw
(Which neuer shall be found) you did suspect
She had dispos'd with Caesar, and that your rage
Would not be purg'd, she sent you word she was dead:
But fearing since how it might worke, hath sent
Me to proclaime the truth, and I am come
I dread, too late

   Ant. Too late good Diomed: call my Guard I prythee

   Dio. What hoa: the Emperors Guard,
The Guard, what hoa? Come, your Lord calles.
Enter 4. or 5. of the Guard of Anthony.

  Ant. Beare me good Friends where Cleopatra bides,
'Tis the last seruice that I shall command you

   1 Woe, woe are we sir, you may not liue to weare
All your true Followers out

   All. Most heauy day

   Ant. Nay good my Fellowes, do not please sharp fate
To grace it with your sorrowes. Bid that welcome
Which comes to punish vs, and we punish it
Seeming to beare it lightly. Take me vp,
I haue led you oft, carry me now good Friends,
And haue my thankes for all.

Exit bearing Anthony

Enter Cleopatra, and her Maides aloft, with Charmian & Iras.

  Cleo. Oh Charmian, I will neuer go from hence

   Char. Be comforted deere Madam

   Cleo. No, I will not:
All strange and terrible euents are welcome,
But comforts we dispise; our size of sorrow
Proportion'd to our cause, must be as great
As that which makes it.
Enter Diomed.

How now? is he dead?
  Diom. His death's vpon him, but not dead.
Looke out o'th other side your Monument,
His Guard haue brought him thither.
Enter Anthony, and the Guard.

  Cleo. Oh Sunne,
Burne the great Sphere thou mou'st in, darkling stand
The varrying shore o'th' world. O Antony, Antony, Antony
Helpe Charmian, helpe Iras helpe: helpe Friends
Below, let's draw him hither

   Ant. Peace,
Not Caesars Valour hath o'rethrowne Anthony,
But Anthonie's hath Triumpht on it selfe

   Cleo. So it should be,
That none but Anthony should conquer Anthony,
But woe 'tis so

   Ant. I am dying Egypt, dying; onely
I heere importune death a-while, vntill
Of many thousand kisses, the poore last
I lay vpon thy lippes

   Cleo. I dare not Deere,
Deere my Lord pardon: I dare not,
Least I be taken: nor th' Imperious shew
Of the full-Fortun'd Caesar, euer shall
Be brooch'd with me, if Knife, Drugges, Serpents haue
Edge, sting, or operation. I am safe:
Your Wife Octauia, with her modest eyes,
And still Conclusion, shall acquire no Honour
Demuring vpon me: but come, come Anthony,
Helpe me my women, we must draw thee vp:
Assist good Friends

   Ant. Oh quicke, or I am gone

   Cleo. Heere's sport indeede:
How heauy weighes my Lord?
Our strength is all gone into heauinesse,
That makes the waight. Had I great Iuno's power,
The strong wing'd Mercury should fetch thee vp,
And set thee by Ioues side. Yet come a little,
Wishers were euer Fooles. Oh come, come, come,

They heaue Anthony aloft to Cleopatra.

And welcome, welcome. Dye when thou hast liu'd,
Quicken with kissing: had my lippes that power,
Thus would I weare them out

   All. A heauy sight

   Ant. I am dying Egypt, dying.
Giue me some Wine, and let me speake a little

   Cleo. No, let me speake, and let me rayle so hye,
That the false Huswife Fortune, breake her Wheele,
Prouok'd by my offence

   Ant. One word (sweet Queene)
Of Caesar seeke your Honour, with your safety. Oh

   Cleo. They do not go together

   Ant. Gentle heare me,
None about Caesar trust, but Proculeius

   Cleo. My Resolution, and my hands, Ile trust,
None about Caesar

   Ant. The miserable change now at my end,
Lament nor sorrow at: but please your thoughts
In feeding them with those my former Fortunes
Wherein I liued. The greatest Prince o'th' world,
The Noblest: and do now not basely dye,
Not Cowardly put off my Helmet to
My Countreyman. A Roman, by a Roman
Valiantly vanquish'd. Now my Spirit is going,
I can no more

   Cleo. Noblest of men, woo't dye?
Hast thou no care of me, shall I abide
In this dull world, which in thy absence is
No better then a Stye? Oh see my women:
The Crowne o'th' earth doth melt. My Lord?
Oh wither'd is the Garland of the Warre,
The Souldiers pole is falne: young Boyes and Gyrles
Are leuell now with men: The oddes is gone,
And there is nothing left remarkeable
Beneath the visiting Moone

   Char. Oh quietnesse, Lady

   Iras. She's dead too, our Soueraigne

   Char. Lady

   Iras. Madam

   Char. Oh Madam, Madam, Madam

   Iras. Royall Egypt: Empresse

   Char. Peace, peace, Iras

   Cleo. No more but in a Woman, and commanded
By such poore passion, as the Maid that Milkes,
And doe's the meanest chares. It were for me,
To throw my Scepter at the iniurious Gods,
To tell them that this World did equall theyrs,
Till they had stolne our Iewell. All's but naught:
Patience is sortish, and impatience does
Become a Dogge that's mad: Then is it sinne,
To rush into the secret house of death,
Ere death dare come to vs. How do you Women?
What, what good cheere? Why how now Charmian?
My Noble Gyrles? Ah Women, women! Looke
Our Lampe is spent, it's out. Good sirs, take heart,
Wee'l bury him: And then, what's braue, what's Noble,
Let's doo't after the high Roman fashion,
And make death proud to take vs. Come, away,
This case of that huge Spirit now is cold.
Ah Women, Women! Come, we haue no Friend
But Resolution, and the breefest end.

Exeunt., bearing of Anthonies body.

Enter Caesar, Agrippa, Dollabella, Menas, with his Counsell of
Warre.

  Caesar. Go to him Dollabella, bid him yeeld,
Being so frustrate, tell him,
He mockes the pawses that he makes

   Dol. Caesar, I shall.
Enter Decretas with the sword of Anthony.

  Caes Wherefore is that? And what art thou that dar'st
Appeare thus to vs?
  Dec. I am call'd Decretas,
Marke Anthony I seru'd, who best was worthie
Best to be seru'd: whil'st he stood vp, and spoke
He was my Master, and I wore my life
To spend vpon his haters. If thou please
To take me to thee, as I was to him,
Ile be to Caesar: if y pleasest not, I yeild thee vp my life

   Caesar. What is't thou say'st?
  Dec. I say (Oh Caesar) Anthony is dead

   Caesar. The breaking of so great a thing, should make
A greater cracke. The round World
Should haue shooke Lyons into ciuill streets,
And Cittizens to their dennes. The death of Anthony
Is not a single doome, in the name lay
A moity of the world

   Dec. He is dead Caesar,
Not by a publike minister of Iustice,
Nor by a hyred Knife, but that selfe-hand
Which writ his Honor in the Acts it did,
Hath with the Courage which the heart did lend it,
Splitted the heart. This is his Sword,
I robb'd his wound of it: behold it stain'd
With his most Noble blood

   Caes Looke you sad Friends,
The Gods rebuke me, but it is Tydings
To wash the eyes of Kings

   Dol. And strange it is,
That Nature must compell vs to lament
Our most persisted deeds

   Mec. His taints and Honours, wag'd equal with him

   Dola. A Rarer spirit neuer
Did steere humanity: but you Gods will giue vs
Some faults to make vs men. Caesar is touch'd

   Mec. When such a spacious Mirror's set before him,
He needes must see him selfe

   Caesar. Oh Anthony,
I haue followed thee to this, but we do launch
Diseases in our Bodies. I must perforce
Haue shewne to thee such a declining day,
Or looke on thine: we could not stall together,
In the whole world. But yet let me lament
With teares as Soueraigne as the blood of hearts,
That thou my Brother, my Competitor,
In top of all designe; my Mate in Empire,
Friend and Companion in the front of Warre,
The Arme of mine owne Body, and the Heart
Where mine his thoughts did kindle; that our Starres
Vnreconciliable, should diuide our equalnesse to this.
Heare me good Friends,
But I will tell you at some meeter Season,
The businesse of this man lookes out of him,
Wee'l heare him what he sayes.
Enter an aegyptian.

Whence are you?
  aegyp. A poore Egyptian yet, the Queen my mistris
Confin'd in all, she has her Monument
Of thy intents, desires, instruction,
That she preparedly may frame her selfe
To'th' way shee's forc'd too

   Caesar. Bid her haue good heart,
She soone shall know of vs, by some of ours,
How honourable, and how kindely Wee
Determine for her. For Caesar cannot leaue to be vngentle
  aegypt. So the Gods preserue thee.
Enter.

  Caes Come hither Proculeius. Go and say
We purpose her no shame: giue her what comforts
The quality of her passion shall require;
Least in her greatnesse, by some mortall stroke
She do defeate vs. For her life in Rome,
Would be eternall in our Triumph: Go,
And with your speediest bring vs what she sayes,
And how you finde of her

   Pro. Caesar I shall.

Exit Proculeius.

  Caes Gallus, go you along: where's Dolabella, to second
Proculeius?
  All. Dolabella

   Caes Let him alone: for I remember now
How hee's imployd: he shall in time be ready.
Go with me to my Tent, where you shall see
How hardly I was drawne into this Warre,
How calme and gentle I proceeded still
In all my Writings. Go with me, and see
What I can shew in this.

Exeunt.

Enter Cleopatra, Charmian, Iras, and Mardian.

  Cleo. My desolation does begin to make
A better life: Tis paltry to be Caesar:
Not being Fortune, hee's but Fortunes knaue,
A minister of her will: and it is great
To do that thing that ends all other deeds,
Which shackles accedents, and bolts vp change;
Which sleepes, and neuer pallates more the dung,
The beggers Nurse, and Caesars.
Enter Proculeius.

  Pro. Caesar sends greeting to the Queene of Egypt,
And bids thee study on what faire demands
Thou mean'st to haue him grant thee

   Cleo. What's thy name?
  Pro. My name is Proculeius

   Cleo. Anthony
Did tell me of you, bad me trust you, but
I do not greatly care to be deceiu'd
That haue no vse for trusting. If your Master
Would haue a Queene his begger, you must tell him,
That Maiesty to keepe decorum, must
No lesse begge then a Kingdome: If he please
To giue me conquer'd Egypt for my Sonne,
He giues me so much of mine owne, as I
Will kneele to him with thankes

   Pro. Be of good cheere:
Y'are falne into a Princely hand, feare nothing,
Make your full reference freely to my Lord,
Who is so full of Grace, that it flowes ouer
On all that neede. Let me report to him
Your sweet dependancie, and you shall finde
A Conqueror that will pray in ayde for kindnesse,
Where he for grace is kneel'd too

   Cleo. Pray you tell him,
I am his Fortunes Vassall, and I send him
The Greatnesse he has got. I hourely learne
A Doctrine of Obedience, and would gladly
Looke him i'th' Face

   Pro. This Ile report (deere Lady)
Haue comfort, for I know your plight is pittied
Of him that caus'd it

   Pro. You see how easily she may be surpriz'd:
Guard her till Caesar come

   Iras. Royall Queene

   Char. Oh Cleopatra, thou art taken Queene

   Cleo. Quicke, quicke, good hands

   Pro. Hold worthy Lady, hold:
Doe not your selfe such wrong, who are in this
Releeu'd, but not betraid

   Cleo. What of death too that rids our dogs of languish
  Pro. Cleopatra, do not abuse my Masters bounty, by
Th' vndoing of your selfe: Let the World see
His Noblenesse well acted, which your death
Will neuer let come forth

   Cleo. Where art thou Death?
Come hither come; Come, come, and take a Queene
Worth many Babes and Beggers

   Pro. Oh temperance Lady

   Cleo. Sir, I will eate no meate, Ile not drinke sir,
If idle talke will once be necessary
Ile not sleepe neither. This mortall house Ile ruine,
Do Caesar what he can. Know sir, that I
Will not waite pinnion'd at your Masters Court,
Nor once be chastic'd with the sober eye
Of dull Octauia. Shall they hoyst me vp,
And shew me to the showting Varlotarie
Of censuring Rome? Rather a ditch in Egypt.
Be gentle graue vnto me, rather on Nylus mudde
Lay me starke-nak'd, and let the water-Flies
Blow me into abhorring; rather make
My Countries high pyramides my Gibbet,
And hang me vp in Chaines

   Pro. You do extend
These thoughts of horror further then you shall
Finde cause in Caesar.
Enter Dolabella.

  Dol. Proculeius,
What thou hast done, thy Master Caesar knowes,
And he hath sent for thee: for the Queene,
Ile take her to my Guard

   Pro. So Dolabella,
It shall content me best: Be gentle to her,
To Caesar I will speake, what you shall please,
If you'l imploy me to him.

Exit Proculeius

  Cleo. Say, I would dye

   Dol. Most Noble Empresse, you haue heard of me

   Cleo. I cannot tell

   Dol. Assuredly you know me

   Cleo. No matter sir, what I haue heard or knowne:
You laugh when Boyes or Women tell their Dreames,
Is't not your tricke?
  Dol. I vnderstand not, Madam

   Cleo. I dreampt there was an Emperor Anthony.
Oh such another sleepe, that I might see
But such another man

   Dol. If it might please ye

   Cleo. His face was as the Heau'ns, and therein stucke
A Sunne and Moone, which kept their course, & lighted
The little o'th' earth

   Dol. Most Soueraigne Creature

   Cleo. His legges bestrid the Ocean, his rear'd arme
Crested the world: His voyce was propertied
As all the tuned Spheres, and that to Friends:
But when he meant to quaile, and shake the Orbe,
He was as ratling Thunder. For his Bounty,
There was no winter in't. An Anthony it was,
That grew the more by reaping: His delights
Were Dolphin-like, they shew'd his backe aboue
The Element they liu'd in: In his Liuery
Walk'd Crownes and Crownets: Realms & Islands were
As plates dropt from his pocket

   Dol. Cleopatra

   Cleo. Thinke you there was, or might be such a man
As this I dreampt of?
  Dol. Gentle Madam, no

   Cleo. You Lye vp to the hearing of the Gods:
But if there be, not euer were one such
It's past the size of dreaming: Nature wants stuffe
To vie strange formes with fancie, yet t' imagine
An Anthony were Natures peece, 'gainst Fancie,
Condemning shadowes quite

   Dol. Heare me, good Madam:
Your losse is as your selfe, great; and you beare it
As answering to the waight, would I might neuer
Ore-take pursu'de successe: But I do feele
By the rebound of yours, a greefe that suites
My very heart at roote

   Cleo. I thanke you sir:
Know you what Caesar meanes to do with me?
  Dol. I am loath to tell you what, I would you knew

   Cleo. Nay pray you sir

   Dol. Though he be Honourable

   Cleo. Hee'l leade me then in Triumph

   Dol. Madam he will, I know't.

Flourish.

Enter Proculeius, Caesar, Gallus, Mecenas, and others of his
Traine.

  All. Make way there Caesar

   Caes Which is the Queene of Egypt

   Dol. It is the Emperor Madam.

Cleo. kneeles.

  Caesar. Arise, you shall not kneele:
I pray you rise, rise Egypt

   Cleo. Sir, the Gods will haue it thus,
My Master and my Lord I must obey,
  Caesar. Take to you no hard thoughts,
The Record of what iniuries you did vs,
Though written in our flesh, we shall remember
As things but done by chance

   Cleo. Sole Sir o'th' World,
I cannot proiect mine owne cause so well
To make it cleare, but do confesse I haue
Bene laden with like frailties, which before
Haue often sham'd our Sex

   Caesar. Cleopatra know,
We will extenuate rather then inforce:
If you apply your selfe to our intents,
Which towards you are most gentle, you shall finde
A benefit in this change: but if you seeke
To lay on me a Cruelty, by taking
Anthonies course, you shall bereaue your selfe
Of my good purposes, and put your children
To that destruction which Ile guard them from,
If thereon you relye. Ile take my leaue

   Cleo. And may through all the world: tis yours, & we
your Scutcheons, and your signes of Conquest shall
Hang in what place you please. Here my good Lord

   Caesar. You shall aduise me in all for Cleopatra

   Cleo. This is the breefe: of Money, Plate, & Iewels
I am possest of, 'tis exactly valewed,
Not petty things admitted. Where's Seleucus?
  Seleu. Heere Madam

   Cleo. This is my Treasurer, let him speake (my Lord)
Vpon his perill, that I haue reseru'd
To my selfe nothing. Speake the truth Seleucus

   Seleu. Madam, I had rather seele my lippes,
Then to my perill speake that which is not

   Cleo. What haue I kept backe

   Sel. Enough to purchase what you haue made known
  Caesar. Nay blush not Cleopatra, I approue
Your Wisedome in the deede

   Cleo. See Caesar: Oh behold,
How pompe is followed: Mine will now be yours,
And should we shift estates, yours would be mine.
The ingratitude of this Seleucus, does
Euen make me wilde. Oh Slaue, of no more trust
Then loue that's hyr'd? What goest thou backe, y shalt
Go backe I warrant thee: but Ile catch thine eyes
Though they had wings. Slaue, Soule-lesse, Villain, Dog.
O rarely base!
  Caesar. Good Queene, let vs intreat you

   Cleo. O Caesar, what a wounding shame is this,
That thou vouchsafing heere to visit me,
Doing the Honour of thy Lordlinesse
To one so meeke, that mine owne Seruant should
Parcell the summe of my disgraces, by
Addition of his Enuy. Say (good Caesar)
That I some Lady trifles haue reseru'd,
Immoment toyes, things of such Dignitie
As we greet moderne Friends withall, and say
Some Nobler token I haue kept apart
For Liuia and Octauia, to induce
Their mediation, must I be vnfolded
With one that I haue bred: The Gods! it smites me
Beneath the fall I haue. Prythee go hence,
Or I shall shew the Cynders of my spirits
Through th' Ashes of my chance: Wer't thou a man,
Thou would'st haue mercy on me

   Caesar. Forbeare Seleucus

   Cleo. Be it known, that we the greatest are mis-thoght
For things that others do: and when we fall,
We answer others merits, in our name
Are therefore to be pittied

   Caesar. Cleopatra,
Not what you haue reseru'd, nor what acknowledg'd
Put we i'th' Roll of Conquest: still bee't yours,
Bestow it at your pleasure, and beleeue
Caesars no Merchant, to make prize with you
Of things that Merchants sold. Therefore be cheer'd,
Make not your thoughts your prisons: No deere Queen,
For we intend so to dispose you, as
Your selfe shall giue vs counsell: Feede, and sleepe:
Our care and pitty is so much vpon you,
That we remaine your Friend, and so adieu

   Cleo. My Master, and my Lord

   Caesar. Not so: Adieu.

Flourish. Exeunt Caesar, and his Traine.

  Cleo. He words me Gyrles, he words me,
That I should not be Noble to my selfe.
But hearke thee Charmian

   Iras. Finish good Lady, the bright day is done,
And we are for the darke

   Cleo. Hye thee againe,
I haue spoke already, and it is prouided,
Go put it to the haste

   Char. Madam, I will.
Enter Dolabella.

  Dol. Where's the Queene?
  Char. Behold sir

   Cleo. Dolabella

   Dol. Madam, as thereto sworne, by your command
(Which my loue makes Religion to obey)
I tell you this: Caesar through Syria
Intends his iourney, and within three dayes,
You with your Children will he send before,
Make your best vse of this. I haue perform'd
Your pleasure, and my promise

   Cleo. Dolabella, I shall remaine your debter

   Dol. I your Seruant:
Adieu good Queene, I must attend on Caesar.

Exit

  Cleo. Farewell, and thankes.
Now Iras, what think'st thou?
Thou, an Egyptian Puppet shall be shewne
In Rome aswell as I: Mechanicke Slaues
With greazie Aprons, Rules, and Hammers shall
Vplift vs to the view. In their thicke breathes,
Ranke of grosse dyet, shall we be enclowded,
And forc'd to drinke their vapour

   Iras. The Gods forbid

   Cleo. Nay, 'tis most certaine Iras: sawcie Lictors
Will catch at vs like Strumpets, and scald Rimers
Ballads vs out a Tune. The quicke Comedians
Extemporally will stage vs, and present
Our Alexandrian Reuels: Anthony
Shall be brought drunken forth, and I shall see
Some squeaking Cleopatra Boy my greatnesse
I'th' posture of a Whore

   Iras. O the good Gods!
  Cleo. Nay that's certaine

   Iras. Ile neuer see't? for I am sure mine Nailes
Are stronger then mine eyes

   Cleo. Why that's the way to foole their preparation,
And to conquer their most absurd intents.
Enter Charmian.

Now Charmian.
Shew me my Women like a Queene: Go fetch
My best Attyres. I am againe for Cidrus,
To meete Marke Anthony. Sirra Iras, go
(Now Noble Charmian, wee'l dispatch indeede,)
And when thou hast done this chare, Ile giue thee leaue
To play till Doomesday: bring our Crowne, and all.

A noise within.

Wherefore's this noise?
Enter a Guardsman.

  Gards. Heere is a rurall Fellow,
That will not be deny'de your Highnesse presence,
He brings you Figges

   Cleo. Let him come in.

Exit Guardsman.

What poore an Instrument
May do a Noble deede: he brings me liberty:
My Resolution's plac'd, and I haue nothing
Of woman in me: Now from head to foote
I am Marble constant: now the fleeting Moone
No Planet is of mine.
Enter Guardsman, and Clowne.

  Guards. This is the man

   Cleo. Auoid, and leaue him.

Exit Guardsman.

Hast thou the pretty worme of Nylus there,
That killes and paines not?
  Clow. Truly I haue him: but I would not be the partie
that should desire you to touch him, for his byting is
immortall: those that doe dye of it, doe seldome or neuer
recouer

   Cleo. Remember'st thou any that haue dyed on't?
  Clow. Very many, men and women too. I heard of
one of them no longer then yesterday, a very honest woman,
but something giuen to lye, as a woman should not
do, but in the way of honesty, how she dyed of the byting
of it, what paine she felt: Truely, she makes a verie
good report o'th' worme: but he that wil beleeue all that
they say, shall neuer be saued by halfe that they do: but
this is most falliable, the Worme's an odde Worme

   Cleo. Get thee hence, farewell

   Clow. I wish you all ioy of the Worme

   Cleo. Farewell

   Clow. You must thinke this (looke you,) that the
Worme will do his kinde

   Cleo. I, I, farewell

   Clow. Looke you, the Worme is not to bee trusted,
but in the keeping of wise people: for indeede, there is
no goodnesse in the Worme

   Cleo. Take thou no care, it shall be heeded

   Clow. Very good: giue it nothing I pray you, for it
is not worth the feeding

   Cleo. Will it eate me?
  Clow. You must not think I am so simple, but I know
the diuell himselfe will not eate a woman: I know, that
a woman is a dish for the Gods, if the diuell dresse her
not. But truly, these same whorson diuels doe the Gods
great harme in their women: for in euery tenne that they
make, the diuels marre fiue

   Cleo. Well, get thee gone, farewell

   Clow. Yes forsooth: I wish you ioy o'th' worm.

Exit

  Cleo. Giue me my Robe, put on my Crowne, I haue
Immortall longings in me. Now no more
The iuyce of Egypts Grape shall moyst this lip.
Yare, yare, good Iras; quicke: Me thinkes I heare
Anthony call: I see him rowse himselfe
To praise my Noble Act. I heare him mock
The lucke of Caesar, which the Gods giue men
To excuse their after wrath. Husband, I come:
Now to that name, my Courage proue my Title.
I am Fire, and Ayre; my other Elements
I giue to baser life. So, haue you done?
Come then, and take the last warmth of my Lippes.
Farewell kinde Charmian, Iras, long farewell.
Haue I the Aspicke in my lippes? Dost fall?
If thou, and Nature can so gently part,
The stroke of death is as a Louers pinch,
Which hurts, and is desir'd. Dost thou lye still?
If thus thou vanishest, thou tell'st the world,
It is not worth leaue-taking

   Char. Dissolue thicke clowd, & Raine, that I may say
The Gods themselues do weepe

   Cleo. This proues me base:
If she first meete the Curled Anthony,
Hee'l make demand of her, and spend that kisse
Which is my heauen to haue. Come thou mortal wretch,
With thy sharpe teeth this knot intrinsicate,
Of life at once vntye: Poore venomous Foole,
Be angry, and dispatch. Oh could'st thou speake,
That I might heare thee call great Caesar Asse, vnpolicied

   Char. Oh Easterne Starre

   Cleo. Peace, peace:
Dost thou not see my Baby at my breast,
That suckes the Nurse asleepe

   Char. O breake! O breake!
  Cleo. As sweet as Balme, as soft as Ayre, as gentle.
O Anthony! Nay I will take thee too.
What should I stay-

Dyes.

  Char. In this wilde World? So fare thee well:
Now boast thee Death, in thy possession lyes
A Lasse vnparalell'd. Downie Windowes cloze,
And golden Phoebus, neuer be beheld
Of eyes againe so Royall: your Crownes away,
Ile mend it, and then play-
Enter the Guard rustling in; and Dolabella.

  1.Guard. Where's the Queene?
  Char. Speake softly, wake her not

   1 Caesar hath sent
  Char. Too slow a Messenger.
Oh come apace, dispatch, I partly feele thee

   1 Approach hoa,
All's not well: Caesar's beguild

   2 There's Dolabella sent from Caesar: call him

   1 What worke is heere Charmian?
Is this well done?
  Char. It is well done, and fitting for a Princesse
Descended of so many Royall Kings.
Ah Souldier.

Charmian dyes.

Enter Dolabella.

  Dol. How goes it heere?
  2.Guard. All dead

   Dol. Caesar, thy thoughts
Touch their effects in this: Thy selfe art comming
To see perform'd the dreaded Act which thou
So sought'st to hinder.
Enter Caesar and all his Traine, marching.

  All. A way there, a way for Caesar

   Dol. Oh sir, you are too sure an Augurer:
That you did feare, is done

   Caesar. Brauest at the last,
She leuell'd at our purposes, and being Royall
Tooke her owne way: the manner of their deaths,
I do not see them bleede

   Dol. Who was last with them?
  1.Guard. A simple Countryman, that broght hir Figs:
This was his Basket

   Caesar. Poyson'd then

   1.Guard. Oh Caesar:
This Charmian liu'd but now, she stood and spake:
I found her trimming vp the Diadem;
On her dead Mistris tremblingly she stood,
And on the sodaine dropt

   Caesar. Oh Noble weakenesse:
If they had swallow'd poyson, 'twould appeare
By externall swelling: but she lookes like sleepe,
As she would catch another Anthony
In her strong toyle of Grace

   Dol. Heere on her brest,
There is a vent of Bloud, and something blowne,
The like is on her Arme

   1.Guard. This is an Aspickes traile,
And these Figge-leaues haue slime vpon them, such
As th' Aspicke leaues vpon the Caues of Nyle

   Caesar. Most probable
That so she dyed: for her Physitian tels mee
She hath pursu'de Conclusions infinite
Of easie wayes to dye. Take vp her bed,
And beare her Women from the Monument,
She shall be buried by her Anthony.
No Graue vpon the earth shall clip in it
A payre so famous: high euents as these
Strike those that make them: and their Story is
No lesse in pitty, then his Glory which
Brought them to be lamented. Our Army shall
In solemne shew, attend this Funerall,
And then to Rome. Come Dolabella, see
High Order, in this great Solemnity.

Exeunt. omnes

FINIS. THE TRAGEDIE OF Anthonie, and Cleopatra.


