**The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Works of Rudyard Kipling**
The One Volume Edition
#12 in our series by Rudyard Kipling


Copyright laws are changing all over the world, be sure to check
the copyright laws for your country before posting these files!!

Please take a look at the important information in this header.
We encourage you to keep this file on your own disk, keeping an
electronic path open for the next readers.  Do not remove this.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**Etexts Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*These Etexts Prepared By Hundreds of Volunteers and Donations*

Information on contacting Project Gutenberg to get Etexts, and
further information is included below.  We need your donations.


The Works of Rudyard Kipling One Volume Edition

by Rudyard Kipling

September, 2000  [Etext #2334]


**The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Works of Rudyard Kipling**
*****This file should be named 1vkip11.txt or 1vkip11.zip******

Corrected EDITIONS of our etexts get a new NUMBER, 1vkip12.txt
VERSIONS based on separate sources get new LETTER, 1vkip10a.txt

This Gutenberg Etext prepared by David Reed <davidr@inconnect.com>

Project Gutenberg Etexts are usually created from multiple editions,
all of which are in the Public Domain in the United States, unless a
copyright notice is included.  Therefore, we usually do NOT keep any
of these books in compliance with any particular paper edition.


We are now trying to release all our books one month in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.

Please note:  neither this list nor its contents are final till
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg Etexts is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.  To be sure you have an
up to date first edition [xxxxx10x.xxx] please check file sizes
in the first week of the next month.  Since our ftp program has
a bug in it that scrambles the date [tried to fix and failed] a
look at the file size will have to do, but we will try to see a
new copy has at least one byte more or less.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any etext selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.  This
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If our value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour this year as we release thirty-six text
files per month, or 432 more Etexts in 1999 for a total of 2000+
If these reach just 10% of the computerized population, then the
total should reach over 200 billion Etexts given away this year.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away One Trillion Etext
Files by December 31, 2001.  [10,000 x 100,000,000 = 1 Trillion]
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only ~5% of the present number of computer users.

At our revised rates of production, we will reach only one-third
of that goal by the end of 2001, or about 3,333 Etexts unless we
manage to get some real funding; currently our funding is mostly
from Michael Hart's salary at Carnegie-Mellon University, and an
assortment of sporadic gifts; this salary is only good for a few
more years, so we are looking for something to replace it, as we
don't want Project Gutenberg to be so dependent on one person.

We need your donations more than ever!


All donations should be made to "Project Gutenberg/CMU": and are
tax deductible to the extent allowable by law.  (CMU = Carnegie-
Mellon University).

For these and other matters, please mail to:

Project Gutenberg
P. O. Box  2782
Champaign, IL 61825

When all other email fails. . .try our Executive Director:
Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>
hart@pobox.com forwards to hart@prairienet.org and
archive.org
if your mail bounces from archive.org, I will still see it,
if
it bounces from prairienet.org, better resend later on. . .
.

We would prefer to send you this information by email.

******

To access Project Gutenberg etexts, use any Web browser
to view http://promo.net/pg.  This site lists Etexts by
author and by title, and includes information about how
to get involved with Project Gutenberg.  You could also
download our past Newsletters, or subscribe here.  This
is one of our major sites, please email hart@pobox.com,
for a more complete list of our various sites.

To go directly to the etext collections, use FTP or any
Web browser to visit a Project Gutenberg mirror (mirror
sites are available on 7 continents; mirrors are listed
at http://promo.net/pg).

Mac users, do NOT point and click, typing works better.

Example FTP session:

ftp sunsite.unc.edu
login: anonymous
password: your@login
cd pub/docs/books/gutenberg
cd etext90 through etext99
dir [to see files]
get or mget [to get files. . .set bin for zip files]
GET GUTINDEX.??  [to get a year's listing of books, e.g.,
GUTINDEX.99]
GET GUTINDEX.ALL [to get a listing of ALL books]

***

**Information prepared by the Project Gutenberg legal
advisor**

(Three Pages)


***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN
ETEXTS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here?  You know:
lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong
with
your copy of this etext, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault.  So, among other things, this "Small Print!"
statement
disclaims most of our liability to you.  It also tells you
how
you can distribute copies of this etext if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS ETEXT
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
etext, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement.  If you do not, you can
receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this etext by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the
person
you got it from.  If you received this etext on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your
request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM ETEXTS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext, like most PROJECT
GUTENBERG-
tm etexts, is a "public domain" work distributed by
Professor
Michael S. Hart through the Project Gutenberg Association at
Carnegie-Mellon University (the "Project").  Among other
things, this means that no one owns a United States
copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules, set
forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this etext
under the Project's "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

To create these etexts, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works.  Despite these efforts, the Project's etexts and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects".  Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate
or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other etext medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described
below,
[1] the Project (and any other party you may receive this
etext from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm etext) disclaims all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR
CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this etext within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from.  If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a
replacement
copy.  If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS ETEXT IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS".  NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU
AS
TO THE ETEXT OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties
or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and
you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold the Project, its directors,
officers, members and agents harmless from all liability,
cost
and expense, including legal fees, that arise directly or
indirectly from any of the following that you do or cause:
[1] distribution of this etext, [2] alteration,
modification,
or addition to the etext, or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this etext electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     etext or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this etext in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word pro-
     cessing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The etext, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The etext may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the etext (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          etext in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the etext refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Project of 20% of the
     net profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Association/Carnegie-Mellon
     University" within the 60 days following each
     date you prepare (or were legally required to prepare)
     your annual (or equivalent periodic) tax return.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
The Project gratefully accepts contributions in money, time,
scanning machines, OCR software, public domain etexts, royalty
free copyright licenses, and every other sort of contribution
you can think of.  Money should be paid to "Project Gutenberg
Association / Carnegie-Mellon University".

*END*THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN
ETEXTS*Ver.04.29.93*END*





This Gutenberg Etext prepared by David Reed <davidr@inconnect.com>




The Works of Rudyard Kipling One Volume Edition

by Rudyard Kipling




CONTENTS

VOLUME I DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES AND OTHER VERSES

DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES

Prelude
General Summary
Army Headquarters
Study of an Elevation, in Indian Ink
A Legend of the Foreign Office
The Story of Uriah
The Post that Fitted
Public Waste
Delilah
What Happened
Pink Dominoes
The Man Who Could Write
Municipal
A Code of Morals
The Last Department

OTHER VERSES
Recessional
The Vampire
To the Unknown Goddess
The Rubaiyat of Omar Kal'vin
La Nuit Blanche
My Rival
The Lovers' Litany
A Ballad of Burial
Divided Destinies
The Masque of Plenty
The Mare's Nest
Possibilities
Christmas in India
Pagett, M. P.
The Song of the Women
A Ballad of Jakko Hill
The Plea of the Simla Dancers
Ballad of Fisher's Boarding-House
"As the Bell Clinks"
An Old Song
Certain Maxims of Hafiz
The Grave of the Hundred Head
The Moon of Other Days
The Overland Mail
What the People Said
The Undertaker's Horse
The Fall of Jock Gillespie
Arithmetic on the Frontier
One Viceroy Resigns
The Betrothed
A Tale of Two Cities

VOLUME II BALLADS AND BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS

BALLADS
The Ballad of East and West
The Last Suttee
The Ballad of the King's Mercy
The Ballad of the King's Jest
The Ballad of Boh Da Thone
The Lament of the Border Cattle Thief
The Rhyme of the Three Captains
The Ballad of the "Clampherdown"
The Ballad of the "Bolivar"
The English Flag
Cleared
An Imperial Rescript
Tomlinson
Danny Deever
Tommy
Fuzzy-Wuzzv
Soldier, Soldier
Screw-Guns
Gunga Din
Oonts
Loot
"Snarleyow"
The Widow at Windsor
Belts
The Young British Soldier
Mandalay
Troopin'
Ford O' Kabul River
Route-Marchin'

VOLUME III  THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW AND OTHER
GHOST STORIES

The Phantom 'Rickshaw
My Own True Ghost Story
The Strange Ride of Morrowbie Jukes
The Man Who Would Be King
"The Finest Story in The World"

VOLUME IV UNDER THE DEODARS

The Education of Otis Yeere
At the Pit's Mouth
A Wayside Comedy
The Hill of Illusion
A Second-rate Woman
Only a Subaltern
In the Matter of a Private
The Enlightenments of Pagett. M. P.

VOLUME V PLAIN TALES FROM THE HILLS

Lispeth
Three And an Extra
Thrown Away
Miss Youghal's Sais
"Yoked With an Unbeliever"
False Dawn
The Rescue of Pluffles
Cupid's Arrows
His Chance in Life
Watches of The Night
The Other Man
Consequences
The Conversion of Aurellan McGoggin
A Germ-destroyer
Kidnapped
The Arrest of Lieutenant Golightly
In The House of Suddhoo
His Wedded Wife
The Broken-link Handicap
Beyond The Pale
In Error
A Bank Fraud
Tods' Amendment
In The Pride of His Youth
Pig
The Rout of The White Hussars
The Bronckhorst Divorce-case
Venus Annodomini
The Bisara of Pooree
A Friend's Friend
The Gate of The Hundred Sorrows
The Story of Muhammad Din
On The Strength of a Likeness
Wressley of The Foreign Office
By Word of Mouth
To Be Filed For Reference
The Last Relief
Bitters Neat
Haunted Subalterns

VOLUME VI  THE LIGHT THAT FAILED

VOLUME VII  THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS

Preface
Poor Dear Mamma
The World Without
The Tents of Kedar
With Any Amazement
The Garden of Eden
Fatima
The Valley of the Shadow
The Swelling of Jordan

VOLUME VIII  from MINE OWN PEOPLE

Bimi
Namgay Doola
The Recrudescence Of Imray
Moti Guj--Mutineer




VOLUME I  DEPARTMENTAL DITTIES AND OTHER VERSES

I have eaten your bread and salt,
   I have drunk your water and wine,
The deaths ye died I have watched beside,
   And the lives that ye led were mine.

Was there aught that I did not share
   In vigil or toil or ease,
One joy or woe that I did not know,
   Dear hearts across the seas?

I have written the tale of our life
   For a sheltered people's mirth,
In jesting guise--but ye are wise,
And ye know what the jest is worth.


GENERAL SUMMARY

We are very slightly changed
From the semi-apes who ranged
   India's prehistoric clay;
Whoso drew the longest bow,
Ran his brother down, you know,
   As we run men down today.

"Dowb," the first of all his race,
Met the Mammoth face to face
   On the lake or in the cave,
Stole the steadiest canoe,
Ate the quarry others slew,
   Died--and took the finest grave.

When they scratched the reindeer-bone
Someone made the sketch his own,
   Filched it from the artist--then,
Even in those early days,
Won a simple Viceroy's praise
   Through the toil of other men.

Ere they hewed the Sphinx's visage
Favoritism governed kissage,
Even as it does in this age.

Who shall doubt the secret hid
Under Cheops' pyramid
Was that the contractor did
   Cheops out of several millions?
Or that Joseph's sudden rise
To Comptroller of Supplies
Was a fraud of monstrous size
   On King Pharoah's swart Civilians?

Thus, the artless songs I sing
Do not deal with anything
   New or never said before.

As it was in the beginning,
Is today official sinning,
   And shall be forevermore.


ARMY HEADQUARTERS

Old is the song that I sing--
   Old as my unpaid bills--
Old as the chicken that kitmutgars bring
Men at dak-bungalows--old as the Hills.

Ahasuerus Jenkins of the "Operatic Own"
Was dowered with a tenor voice of super-Santley tone.

His views on equitation were, perhaps, a trifle queer;
He had no seat worth mentioning, but oh! he had an ear.

He clubbed his wretched company a dozen times a day,
He used to quit his charger in a parabolic way,
His method of saluting was the joy of all beholders,
But Ahasuerus Jenkins had a head upon his shoulders.

He took two months to Simla when the year was at the spring,
And underneath the deodars eternally did sing.

He warbled like a bulbul, but particularly at
Cornelia Agrippina who was musical and fat.

She controlled a humble husband, who, in turn, controlled a Dept.,
Where Cornelia Agrippina's human singing-birds were kept
From April to October on a plump retaining fee,
Supplied, of course, per mensem, by the Indian Treasury.

Cornelia used to sing with him, and Jenkins used to play;
He praised unblushingly her notes, for he was false as they:
So when the winds of April turned the budding roses brown,
Cornelia told her husband: "Tom, you mustn't send him down."

They haled him from his regiment which didn't much regret him;
They found for him an office-stool, and on that stool they set him,
To play with maps and catalogues three idle hours a day,
And draw his plump retaining fee--which means his double pay.

Now, ever after dinner, when the coffeecups are brought,
Ahasuerus waileth o'er the grand pianoforte;
And, thanks to fair Cornelia, his fame hath waxen great,
And Ahasuerus Jenkins is a power in the State.

STUDY OF AN ELEVATION, IN INDIAN INK

This ditty is a string of lies.
But--how the deuce did Gubbins rise?

POTIPHAR GUBBINS, C. E.,
Stands at the top of the tree;
And I muse in my bed on the reasons that led
To the hoisting of Potiphar G.

Potiphar Gubbins, C. E.,
Is seven years junior to Me;
Each bridge that he makes he either buckles or breaks,
And his work is as rough as he.

Potiphar Gubbins, C. E.,
Is coarse as a chimpanzee;
And I can't understand why you gave him your hand, 
Lovely Mehitabel Lee.

Potiphar Gubbins, C. E.,
Is dear to the Powers that Be;
For They bow and They smile in an affable style
Which is seldom accorded to Me.

Potiphar Gubbins, C. E.,
Is certain as certain can be
Of a highly-paid post which is claimed by a host
Of seniors--including Me.

Careless and lazy is he,
Greatly inferior to Me.

What is the spell that you manage so well,
Commonplace Potiphar G.?

Lovely Mehitabel Lee,
Let me inquire of thee,
Should I have riz to what Potiphar is,
Hadst thou been mated to me?


A LEGEND

This is the reason why Rustum Beg,
Rajah of Kolazai,
Drinketh the "simpkin" and brandy peg,
Maketh the money to fly,
Vexeth a Government, tender and kind,
Also--but this is a detail--blind.

RUSTUM BEG of Kolazai--slightly backward native state
Lusted for a C. S. I.,--so began to sanitate.
Built a Jail and Hospital--nearly built a City drain--
Till his faithful subjects all thought their Ruler was insane.

Strange departures made he then--yea, Departments stranger still,
Half a dozen Englishmen helped the Rajah with a will,
Talked of noble aims and high, hinted of a future fine
For the state of Kolazai, on a strictly Western line.

Rajah Rustum held his peace; lowered octroi dues a half;
Organized a State Police; purified the. Civil Staff;
Settled cess and tax afresh in a very liberal way;
Cut temptations of the flesh--also cut the Bukhshi's pay;

Roused his Secretariat to a fine Mahratta fury,
By a Hookum hinting at supervision of dasturi;
Turned the State of Kolazai very nearly upside-down;
When the end of May was nigh, waited his achievement crown.

When the Birthday Honors came, 
Sad to state and sad to see,
Stood against the Rajah's name nothing more than C. I. E.!
*   *   *   *   *

Things were lively for a week in the State of Kolazai.
Even now the people speak of that time regretfully.

How he disendowed the Jail--stopped at once the City drain;
Turned to beauty fair and frail--got his senses back again;
Doubled taxes, cesses, all; cleared away each new-built thana;
Turned the two-lakh Hospital into a superb Zenana;

Heaped upon the Bukhshi Sahib wealth and honors manifold;
Clad himself in Eastern garb--squeezed his people as of old.

Happy, happy Kolazai!  Never more  will Rustum Beg
Play to catch the Viceroy's eye. He prefers the "simpkin" peg.


THE STORY OF URIAH

"Now there were two men in one city;
the one rich and the other poor."

Jack Barrett went to Quetta
   Because they told him to.
He left his wife at Simla
   On three-fourths his monthly screw:
Jack Barrett died at Quetta
   Ere the next month's pay he drew.

Jack Barrett went to Quetta.
   He didn't understand
The reason of his transfer
   From the pleasant mountain-land:
The season was September,
   And it killed him out of hand.

Jack Barrett went to Quetta,
   And there gave up the ghost,
Attempting two men's duty
   In that very healthy post;
And Mrs. Barrett mourned for him
   Five lively months at most.

Jack Barrett's bones at Quetta
   Enjoy profound repose;
But I shouldn't be astonished
   If now his spirit knows
The reason of his transfer
   From the Himalayan snows.

And, when the Last Great Bugle Call
   Adown the Hurnal throbs,
When the last grim joke is entered
   In the big black Book of Jobs,
And Quetta graveyards give again
   Their victims to the air,
I shouldn't like to be the man
   Who sent Jack Barrett there.


THE POST THAT FITTED

    Though tangled and twisted the course of true love
            This ditty explains,
    No tangle's so tangled it cannot improve
            If the Lover has brains.

Ere the steamer bore him Eastward, Sleary was engaged to marry
An attractive girl at Tunbridge, whom he called "my little Carrie."

Sleary's pay was very modest; Sleary was the other way.
Who can cook a two-plate dinner on eight poor rupees a day?

Long he pondered o'er the question in his scantly furnished quarters--
Then proposed to Minnie Boffkin, eldest of Judge Boffkin's daughters.

Certainly an impecunious Subaltern was not a catch,
But the Boffkins knew that Minnie mightn't make another match.

So they recognised the business and, to feed and clothe the bride,
Got him made a Something Something somewhere on the Bombay side.

Anyhow, the billet carried pay enough for him to marry--
As the artless Sleary put it:--"Just the thing for me and Carrie."

Did he, therefore, jilt Miss Boffkin--impulse of a baser mind?
No! He started epileptic fits of an appalling kind.

[Of his modus operandi only this much I could gather:--
"Pears's shaving sticks will give you little taste and lots of lather."]

Frequently in public places his affliction used to smite
Sleary with distressing vigour--always in the Boffkins' sight.

Ere a week was over Minnie weepingly returned his ring,
Told him his "unhappy weakness" stopped all thought of marrying.

Sleary bore the information with a chastened holy joy,--
Epileptic fits don't matter in Political employ,--
Wired three short words to Carrie--took his ticket, packed his kit--
Bade farewell to Minnie Boffkin in one last, long, lingering fit.

Four weeks later, Carrie Sleary read--and laughed until she wept--
Mrs. Boffkin's warning letter on the "wretched epilept." . . .

Year by year, in pious patience, vengeful Mrs. Boffkin sits
Waiting for the Sleary babies to develop Sleary's fits.

PUBLIC WASTE

  Walpole talks of "a man and his price."
        List to a ditty queer--
  The sale of a Deputy-Acting-Vice-
        Resident-Engineer,
  Bought like a bullock, hoof and hide,
  By the Little Tin Gods on the Mountain Side.

By the Laws of the Family Circle 'tis written in letters of brass
That only a Colonel from Chatham can manage the Railways of State,
Because of the gold on his breeks, and the subjects wherein he must pass;
Because in all matters that deal not with Railways his knowledge is great.

Now Exeter Battleby Tring had laboured from boyhood to eld
On the Lines of the East and the West, and eke of the North and South;
Many Lines had he built and surveyed--important the posts which he held;
And the Lords of the Iron Horse were dumb when he opened his mouth.

Black as the raven his garb, and his heresies jettier still--
Hinting that Railways required lifetimes of study and knowledge--
Never clanked sword by his side--Vauban he knew not nor drill--
Nor was his name on the list of the men who had passed through the "College."

Wherefore the Little Tin Gods harried their little tin souls,
Seeing he came not from Chatham, jingled no spurs at his heels,
Knowing that, nevertheless, was he first on the Government rolls
For the billet of "Railway Instructor to Little Tin Gods on Wheels."

Letters not seldom they wrote him, "having the honour to state,"
It would be better for all men if he were laid on the shelf.
Much would accrue to his bank-book, an he consented to wait
Until the Little Tin Gods built him a berth for himself,

"Special, well paid, and exempt from the Law of the Fifty and Five,
Even to Ninety and Nine"--these were the terms of the pact:
Thus did the Little Tin Gods (long may Their Highnesses thrive!)
Silence his mouth with rupees, keeping their Circle intact;

Appointing a Colonel from Chatham who managed the Bhamo State Line
(The which was one mile and one furlong--a guaranteed twenty-inch gauge),
So Exeter Battleby Tring consented his claims to resign,
And died, on four thousand a month, in the ninetieth year of his age!


DELILAH

We have another viceroy now,--those days are dead and done
Of Delilah Aberyswith and depraved Ulysses Gunne.

Delilah Aberyswith was a lady--not too young--
With a perfect taste in dresses and a badly-bitted tongue,
With a thirst for information, and a greater thirst for praise,
And a little house in Simla in the Prehistoric Days.

By reason of her marriage to a gentleman in power,
Delilah was acquainted with the gossip of the hour;
And many little secrets, of the half-official kind,
Were whispered to Delilah, and she bore them all in mind.

She patronized extensively a man, Ulysses Gunne,
Whose mode of earning money was a low and shameful one.
He wrote for certain papers, which, as everybody knows,
Is worse than serving in a shop or scaring off the crows.

He praised her "queenly beauty" first; and, later on, he hinted
At the "vastness of her intellect" with compliment unstinted.
He went with her a-riding, and his love for her was such
That he lent her all his horses and--she galled them very much.

One day, THEY brewed a secret of a fine financial sort;
It related to Appointments, to a Man and a Report.
'Twas almost worth the keeping,--only seven people knew it--
And Gunne rose up to seek the truth and patiently pursue it.

It was a Viceroy's Secret, but--perhaps the wine was red--
Perhaps an Aged Councillor had lost his aged head--
Perhaps Delilah's eyes were bright--Delilah's whispers sweet--
The Aged Member told her what 'twere treason to repeat.

Ulysses went a-riding, and they talked of love and flowers;
Ulysses went a-calling, and he called for several hours;
Ulysses went a-waltzing, and Delilah helped him dance--
Ulysses let the waltzes go, and waited for his chance.

The summer sun was setting, and the summer air was still,
The couple went a-walking in the shade of Summer Hill.
The wasteful sunset faded out in Turkish-green and gold,
Ulysses pleaded softly, and-- that bad Delilah told!

Next morn, a startled Empire learnt the all-important news;
Next week, the Aged Councillor was shaking in his shoes.
Next month, I met Delilah and she did not show the least
Hesitation in affirming that Ulysses was a "beast."
            *   *   *   *   *

We have another Viceroy now, those days are dead and done--
Of Delilah Aberyswith and most mean Ulysses Gunne!


WHAT HAPPENED

Hurree Chunder Mookerjee, pride of Bow Bazaar,
Owner of a native press, "Barrishter-at-Lar,"
Waited on the Government with a claim to wear
Sabres by the bucketful, rifles by the pair.

Then the Indian Government winked a wicked wink,
Said to Chunder Mookerjee: "Stick to pen and ink.
They are safer implements, but, if you insist,
We will let you carry arms wheresoe'er you list."

Hurree Chunder Mookerjee sought the gunsmith and
Bought the tubes of Lancaster, Ballard, Dean, and Bland,
Bought a shiny bowie-knife, bought a town-made sword,
Jingled like a carriage-horse when he went abroad.

But the Indian Government, always keen to please,
Also gave permission to horrid men like these--
Yar Mahommed Yusufzai, down to kill or steal,
Chimbu Singh from Bikaneer, Tantia the Bhil;

Killar Khan the Marri chief, Jowar Singh the Sikh,
Nubbee Baksh Punjabi Jat, Abdul Huq Rafiq--
He was a Wahabi; last, little Boh Hla-oo
Took advantage of the Act--took a Snider too.

They were unenlightened men, Ballard knew them not.
They procured their swords and guns chiefly on the spot;
And the lore of centuries, plus a hundred fights,
Made them slow to disregard one another's rights.

With a unanimity dear to patriot hearts
All those hairy gentlemen out of foreign parts
Said: "The good old days are back--let us go to war!"
Swaggered down the Grand Trunk Road into Bow Bazaar,

Nubbee Baksh Punjabi Jat found a hide-bound flail;
Chimbu Singh from Bikaneer oiled his Tonk jezail;
Yar Mahommed Yusufzai spat and grinned with glee
As he ground the butcher-knife of the Khyberee.

Jowar Singh the Sikh procured sabre, quoit, and mace,
Abdul Huq, Wahabi, jerked his dagger from its place,
While amid the jungle-grass danced and grinned and jabbered
Little Boh Hla-oo and cleared his dah-blade from the scabbard.

What became of Mookerjee? Soothly, who can say?
Yar Mahommed only grins in a nasty way,
Jowar Singh is reticent, Chimbu Singh is mute.
But the belts of all of them simply bulge with loot.

What became of Ballard's guns? Afghans black and grubby
Sell them for their silver weight to the men of Pubbi;
And the shiny bowie-knife and the town-made sword are
Hanging in a Marri camp just across the Border.

What became of Mookerjee? Ask Mahommed Yar
Prodding Siva's sacred bull down the Bow Bazaar.
Speak to placid Nubbee Baksh--question land and sea--
Ask the Indian Congressmen--only don't ask me!


PINK DOMINOES

They are fools who kiss and tell"--
  Wisely has the poet sung.
Man may hold all sorts of posts
  If he'll only hold his tongue.

Jenny and Me were engaged, you see,
  On the eve of the Fancy Ball;
So a kiss or two was nothing to you
  Or any one else at all.

Jenny would go in a domino--
  Pretty and pink but warm;
While I attended, clad in a splendid
  Austrian uniform.

Now we had arranged, through notes exchanged
  Early that afternoon,
At Number Four to waltz no more,
  But to sit in the dusk and spoon.

I wish you to see that Jenny and Me
  Had barely exchanged our troth;
So a kiss or two was strictly due
  By, from, and between us both.

When Three was over, an eager lover,
  I fled to the gloom outside;
And a Domino came out also
  Whom I took for my future bride.

That is to say, in a casual way,
  I slipped my arm around her;
With a kiss or two (which is nothing to you),
  And ready to kiss I found her.

She turned her head and the name she said
  Was certainly not my own;
But ere I could speak, with a smothered shriek
  She fled and left me alone.

Then Jenny came, and I saw with shame
  She'd doffed her domino;
And I had embraced an alien waist--
  But I did not tell her so.

Next morn I knew that there were two
  Dominoes pink, and one
Had cloaked the spouse of Sir Julian House,
  Our big Political gun.

Sir J. was old, and her hair was gold,
  And her eye was a blue cerulean;
And the name she said when she turned her head
  Was not in the least like "Julian."


THE MAN WHO COULD WRITE

Shun--shun the Bowl! That fatal, facile drink
  Has ruined many geese who dipped their quills in 't;
Bribe, murder, marry, but steer clear of Ink
  Save when you write receipts for paid-up bills in 't.

There may be silver in the "blue-black"--all
I know of is the iron and the gall.

Boanerges Blitzen, servant of the Queen,
Is a dismal failure--is a Might-have-been.
In a luckless moment he discovered men
Rise to high position through a ready pen.
Boanerges Blitzen argued therefore--"I,
With the selfsame weapon, can attain as high."
Only he did not possess when he made the trial,
Wicked wit of C-lv-n, irony of L--l.

[Men who spar with Government need, to back their blows,
Something more than ordinary journalistic prose.]

Never young Civilian's prospects were so bright,
Till an Indian paper found that he could write:
Never young Civilian's prospects were so dark,
When the wretched Blitzen wrote to make his mark.
Certainly he scored it, bold, and black, and firm,
In that Indian paper--made his seniors squirm,
Quoted office scandals, wrote the tactless truth--
Was there ever known a more misguided youth?
When the Rag he wrote for praised his plucky game,
Boanerges Blitzen felt that this was Fame;
When the men he wrote of shook their heads and swore,
Boanerges Blitzen only wrote the more:

Posed as Young Ithuriel, resolute and grim,
Till he found promotion didn't come to him;
Till he found that reprimands weekly were his lot,
And his many Districts curiously hot.

Till he found his furlough strangely hard to win,
Boanerges Blitzen didn't care to pin:
Then it seemed to dawn on him something wasn't right--
Boanerges Blitzen put it down to "spite";

Languished in a District desolate and dry;
Watched the Local Government yearly pass him by;
Wondered where the hitch was; called it most unfair.
*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

That was seven years ago--and he still is there!


MUNICIPAL

        "Why is my District death-rate low?"
          Said Binks of Hezabad.
        "Well, drains, and sewage-outfalls are
          "My own peculiar fad.

        "I learnt a lesson once, It ran
        "Thus," quoth that most veracious man:--

It was an August evening and, in snowy garments clad,
I paid a round of visits in the lines of Hezabad;
When, presently, my Waler saw, and did not like at all,
A Commissariat elephant careering down the Mall.

I couldn't see the driver, and across my mind it rushed
That that Commissariat elephant had suddenly gone musth.

I didn't care to meet him, and I couldn't well get down,
So I let the Waler have it, and we headed for the town.

The buggy was a new one and, praise Dykes, it stood the strain,
Till the Waler jumped a bullock just above the City Drain;
And the next that I remember was a hurricane of squeals,
And the creature making toothpicks of my five-foot patent wheels.

He seemed to want the owner, so I fled, distraught with fear,
To the Main Drain sewage-outfall while he snorted in my ear--
Reached the four-foot drain-head safely and, in darkness and despair,
Felt the brute's proboscis fingering my terror-stiffened hair.

Heard it trumpet on my shoulder--tried to crawl a little higher--
Found the Main Drain sewage outfall blocked, some eight feet up, with mire;
And, for twenty reeking minutes, Sir, my very marrow froze,
While the trunk was feeling blindly for a purchase on my toes!

It missed me by a fraction, but my hair was turning grey
Before they called the drivers up and dragged the brute away.

Then I sought the City Elders, and my words were very plain.
They flushed that four-foot drain-head and--it never choked again!

You may hold with surface-drainage, and the sun-for-garbage cure,
Till you've been a periwinkle shrinking coyly up a sewer.

I believe in well-flushed culverts. . . .

                                  This is why the death-rate's small;
And, if you don't believe me, get shikarred yourself. That's all.


A CODE OF MORALS

         Lest you should think this story true
         I merely mention I
         Evolved it lately. 'Tis a most
         Unmitigated misstatement.

Now Jones had left his new-wed bride to keep his house in order,
And hied away to the Hurrum Hills above the Afghan border,
To sit on a rock with a heliograph; but ere he left he taught
His wife the working of the Code that sets the miles at naught.

And Love had made him very sage, as Nature made her fair;
So Cupid and Apollo linked , per heliograph, the pair.
At dawn, across the Hurrum Hills, he flashed her counsel wise--
At e'en, the dying sunset bore her husband's homilies.

He warned her 'gainst seductive youths in scarlet clad and gold,
As much as 'gainst the blandishments paternal of the old;
But kept his gravest warnings for (hereby the ditty hangs)
That snowy-haired Lothario, Lieutenant-General Bangs.

'Twas General Bangs, with Aide and Staff, who tittupped on the way,
When they beheld a heliograph tempestuously at play.
They thought of Border risings, and of stations sacked and burnt--
So stopped to take the message down--and this is what they learnt--

"Dash dot dot, dot, dot dash, dot dash dot" twice. The General swore.

"Was ever General Officer addressed as 'dear' before?
"'My Love,' i' faith! 'My Duck,' Gadzooks! 'My darling popsy-wop!'
"Spirit of great Lord Wolseley, who is on that mountaintop?"

The artless Aide-de-camp was mute; the gilded Staff were still,
As, dumb with pent-up mirth, they booked that message from the hill;
For clear as summer lightning-flare, the husband's warning ran:--
"Don't dance or ride with General Bangs--a most immoral man."

[At dawn, across the Hurrum Hills, he flashed her counsel wise--
But, howsoever Love be blind, the world at large hath eyes.]
With damnatory dot and dash he heliographed his wife
Some interesting details of the General's private life.

The artless Aide-de-camp was mute, the shining Staff were still,
And red and ever redder grew the General's shaven gill.

And this is what he said at last (his feelings matter not):--
"I think we've tapped a private line. Hi! Threes about there! Trot!"

All honour unto Bangs, for ne'er did Jones thereafter know
By word or act official who read off that helio.

But the tale is on the Frontier, and from Michni to Mooltan
They know the worthy General as "that most immoral man."


THE LAST DEPARTMENT

Twelve hundred million men are spread
 About this Earth, and I and You
Wonder, when You and I are dead,
 "What will those luckless millions do?"

None whole or clean, " we cry, "or free from stain
Of favour." Wait awhile, till we attain
  The Last Department where nor fraud nor fools,
Nor grade nor greed, shall trouble us again.

Fear, Favour, or Affection--what are these
To the grim Head who claims our services?
  I never knew a wife or interest yet
Delay that pukka step, miscalled "decease";

When leave, long overdue, none can deny;
When idleness of all Eternity
  Becomes our furlough, and the marigold
Our thriftless, bullion-minting Treasury

Transferred to the Eternal Settlement,
Each in his strait, wood-scantled office pent,
  No longer Brown reverses Smith's appeals,
Or Jones records his Minute of Dissent.

And One, long since a pillar of the Court,
As mud between the beams thereof is wrought;
  And One who wrote on phosphates for the crops
Is subject-matter of his own Report.

These be the glorious ends whereto we pass--
Let Him who Is, go call on Him who Was;
  And He shall see the mallie steals the slab
For currie-grinder, and for goats the grass.

A breath of wind, a Border bullet's flight,
A draught of water, or a horse's fright--
  The droning of the fat Sheristadar
Ceases, the punkah stops, and falls the night

For you or Me. Do those who live decline
The step that offers, or their work resign?
  Trust me, Today's Most Indispensables,
Five hundred men can take your place or mine.


OTHER VERSES


RECESSIONAL
(A Victorian Ode)

God of our fathers, known of old--
  Lord of our far-flung battle line--
Beneath whose awful hand we hold
  Dominion over palm and pine--

Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget--lest we forget!

The tumult and the shouting dies--
  The Captains and the Kings depart--
Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice,
  An humble and a contrite heart.

Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget--lest we forget!

Far-called our navies melt away--
  On dune and headland sinks the fire--
Lo, all our pomp of yesterday
  Is one with Nineveh and Tyre!

Judge of the Nations, spare us yet,
Lest we forget--lest we forget!

If, drunk with sight of power, we loose
  Wild tongues that have not Thee in awe--
Such boastings as the Gentiles use,
  Or lesser breeds without the Law--

Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget--lest we forget!

For heathen heart that puts her trust
  In reeking tube and iron shard--
All valiant dust that builds on dust,
  And guarding calls not Thee to guard.

For frantic boast and foolish word,
Thy Mercy on Thy People, Lord!
                              Amen.


THE VAMPIRE

The verses--as suggested by the painting by Philip Burne Jones, first
exhibited at the new gallery in London in 1897.

A fool there was and he made his prayer
  (Even as you and I!)
To a rag and a bone and a hank of hair
(We called her the woman who did not care),
But the fool he called her his lady fair
  (Even as you and I!)

Oh the years we waste and the tears we waste
  And the work of our head and hand,
Belong to the woman who did not know
(And now we know that she never could know)
  And did not understand.

A fool there was and his goods he spent
  (Even as you and I!)
Honor and faith and a sure intent
But a fool must follow his natural bent
(And it wasn't the least what the lady meant),
  (Even as you and I!)

Oh the toil we lost and the spoil we lost
  And the excellent things we planned,
Belong to the woman who didn't know why
(And now we know she never knew why)
  And did not understand.

The fool we stripped to his foolish hide
  (Even as you and I!)
Which she might have seen when she threw him aside--
(But it isn't on record the lady tried)
So some of him lived but the most of him died--
  (Even as you and I!)

And it isn't the shame and it isn't the blame
  That stings like a white hot brand.

It's coming to know that she never knew why
(Seeing at last she could never know why)
  And never could understand.


TO THE UNKNOWN GODDESS

Will you conquer my heart with your beauty; my soul going out from afar?
Shall I fall to your hand as a victim of crafty and cautious shikar?

Have I met you and passed you already, unknowing, unthinking and blind?
Shall I meet you next session at Simla, O sweetest and best of your kind?

Does the P. and O. bear you to meward, or, clad in short frocks in the West,
Are you growing the charms that shall capture and torture the heart in my
breast?

Will you stay in the Plains till September--my passion as warm as the day?
Will you bring me to book on the Mountains, or where the thermantidotes play?

When the light of your eyes shall make pallid the mean lesser lights I pursue,
And the charm of your presence shall lure me from love of the gay "thirteen-
two";

When the peg and the pig-skin shall please not; when I buy me Calcutta-build
clothes;
When I quit the Delight of Wild Asses; forswearing the swearing of oaths ;
As a deer to the hand of the hunter when I turn 'mid the gibes of my friends;
When the days of my freedom are numbered, and the life of the bachelor ends.

Ah, Goddess! child, spinster, or widow--as of old on Mars Hill whey they
raised
To the God that they knew not an altar--so I, a young Pagan, have praised
The Goddess I know not nor worship; yet, if half that men tell me be true,
You will come in the future, and therefore these verses are written to you.


THE RUPAIYAT OF OMAR KAL'VIN

[Allowing for the difference 'twixt prose and rhymed exaggeration, this ought
to reproduce the sense of what Sir A-- told the nation sometime ago, when the
Government struck from our incomes two per cent.]

Now the New Year, reviving last Year's Debt,
The Thoughtful Fisher casteth wide his Net;
  So I with begging Dish and ready Tongue
Assail all Men for all that I can get.

Imports indeed are gone with all their Dues--
Lo! Salt a Lever that I dare not use,
  Nor may I ask the Tillers in Bengal--
Surely my Kith and Kin will not refuse!

Pay--and I promise by the Dust of Spring,
Retrenchment.  If my promises can bring
  Comfort, Ye have Them now a thousandfold--
By Allah! I will promise Anything!

Indeed, indeed, Retrenchment oft before
I swore--but did I mean it when I swore?
  And then, and then, We wandered to the Hills,
And so the Little Less became Much More.

Whether a Boileaugunge or Babylon,
I know not how the wretched Thing is done,
  The Items of Receipt grow surely small;
The Items of Expense mount one by one.

I cannot help it. What have I to do
With One and Five, or Four, or Three, or Two?
  Let Scribes spit Blood and Sulphur as they please,
Or Statesmen call me foolish--Heed not you.

Behold, I promise--Anything You will.
Behold, I greet you with an empty Till--
  Ah! Fellow-Sinners, of your Charity
Seek not the Reason of the Dearth, but fill.

For if I sinned and fell, where lies the Gain
Of Knowledge? Would it ease you of your Pain
  To know the tangled Threads of Revenue,
I ravel deeper in a hopeless Skein?

"Who hath not Prudence"--what was it I said,
Of Her who paints her Eyes and tires Her Head,
  And gibes and mocks the People in the Street,
And fawns upon them for Her thriftless Bread?

Accursed is She of Eve's daughters--She
Hath cast off Prudence, and Her End shall be
  Destruction . . . Brethren, of your Bounty
Some portion of your daily Bread to Me.


LA NUIT BLANCHE

  A much-discerning Public hold
    The Singer generally sings
  And prints and sells his past for gold.

  Whatever I may here disclaim,
    The very clever folk I sing to
    Will most indubitably cling to
  Their pet delusion, just the same.

I had seen, as the dawn was breaking
  And I staggered to my rest,
Tari Devi softly shaking
  From the Cart Road to the crest.

I had seen the spurs of Jakko
  Heave and quiver, swell and sink.
Was it Earthquake or tobacco,
  Day of Doom, or Night of Drink?

In the full, fresh fragrant morning
  I observed a camel crawl,
Laws of gravitation scorning,
  On the ceiling and the wall;
Then I watched a fender walking,
  And I heard grey leeches sing,
And a red-hot monkey talking
  Did not seem the proper thing.

Then a Creature, skinned and crimson,
  Ran about the floor and cried,
And they said that I had the "jims" on,
  And they dosed me with bromide,
And they locked me in my bedroom--
  Me and one wee Blood Red Mouse--
Though I said: "To give my head room
  You had best unroof the house."

But my words were all unheeded,
  Though I told the grave M.D.
That the treatment really needed
  Was a dip in open sea
That was lapping just below me,
  Smooth as silver, white as snow,
And it took three men to throw me
  When I found I could not go.

Half the night I watched the Heavens
  Fizz like '81 champagne--
Fly to sixes and to sevens,
  Wheel and thunder back again;
And when all was peace and order
  Save one planet nailed askew,
Much I wept because my warder
  Would not let me set it true.

After frenzied hours of waiting,
  When the Earth and Skies were dumb,
Pealed an awful voice dictating
  An interminable sum,
Changing to a tangle story--
  "What she said you said I said"--
Till the Moon arose in glory,
  And I found her . . . in my head;

Then a Face came, blind and weeping,
  And It couldn't wipe its eyes,
And It muttered I was keeping
  Back the moonlight from the skies;
So I patted it for pity,
  But it whistled shrill with wrath,
And a huge black Devil City
  Poured its peoples on my path.

So I fled with steps uncertain
  On a thousand-year long race,
But the bellying of the curtain
  Kept me always in one place;
While the tumult rose and maddened
  To the roar of Earth on fire,
Ere it ebbed and sank and saddened
  To a whisper tense as wire.

In tolerable stillness
  Rose one little, little star,
And it chuckled at my illness,
  And it mocked me from afar;
And its brethren came and eyed me,
  Called the Universe to aid,
Till I lay, with naught to hide me,
  'Neath the Scorn of All Things Made.

Dun and saffron, robed and splendid,
  Broke the solemn, pitying Day,
And I knew my pains were ended,
  And I turned and tried to pray;
But my speech was shattered wholly,
  And I wept as children weep.

Till the dawn-wind, softly, slowly,
  Brought to burning eyelids sleep.


MY RIVAL

I go to concert, party, ball--
  What profit is in these?
I sit alone against the wall
  And strive to look at ease.

The incense that is mine by right
  They burn before her shrine;
And that's because I'm seventeen
  And She is forty-nine.

I cannot check my girlish blush,
  My color comes and goes;
I redden to my finger-tips,
  And sometimes to my nose.

But She is white where white should be,
  And red where red should shine.
The blush that flies at seventeen
  Is fixed at forty-nine.

I wish I had Her constant cheek;
  I wish that I could sing
All sorts of funny little songs,
  Not quite the proper thing.

I'm very gauche and very shy,
  Her jokes aren't in my line;
And, worst of all, I'm seventeen
  While She is forty-nine.

The young men come, the young men go
  Each pink and white and neat,
She's older than their mothers, but
  They grovel at Her feet.

They walk beside Her 'rickshaw wheels--
  None ever walk by mine;
And that's because I'm seventeen
  And She is forty-nine.

She rides with half a dozen men,
  (She calls them "boys" and "mashers")
I trot along the Mall alone;
  My prettiest frocks and sashes
Don't help to fill my programme-card,
  And vainly I repine
From ten to two A.M. Ah me!
  Would I were forty-nine!

She calls me "darling," "pet," and "dear,"
  And "sweet retiring maid."
I'm always at the back, I know,
  She puts me in the shade.

She introduces me to men,
  "Cast" lovers, I opine,
For sixty takes to seventeen,
  Nineteen to forty-nine.

But even She must older grow
  And end Her dancing days,
She can't go on forever so
  At concerts, balls and plays.

One ray of priceless hope I see
  Before my footsteps shine;
Just think, that She'll be eighty-one
  When I am forty-nine.


THE LOVERS' LITANY

Eyes of grey--a sodden quay,
Driving rain and falling tears,
As the steamer wears to sea
In a parting storm of cheers.

  Sing, for Faith and Hope are high--
  None so true as you and I--
  Sing the Lovers' Litany:
  "Love like ours can never die!"

Eyes of black--a throbbing keel,
Milky foam to left and right;
Whispered converse near the wheel
In the brilliant tropic night.

  Cross that rules the Southern Sky!
  Stars that sweep and wheel and fly,
  Hear the Lovers' Litany:
  Love like ours can never die!"

Eyes of brown--a dusty plain
Split and parched with heat of June,
Flying hoof and tightened rein,
Hearts that beat the old, old tune.

  Side by side the horses fly,
  Frame we now the old reply
  Of the Lovers' Litany:
  "Love like ours can never die!"

Eyes of blue--the Simla Hills
Silvered with the moonlight hoar;
Pleading of the waltz that thrills,
Dies and echoes round Benmore.

  "Mabel," "Officers," "Goodbye,"
  Glamour, wine, and witchery--
  On my soul's sincerity,
  "Love like ours can never die!"

Maidens of your charity,
Pity my most luckless state.
Four times Cupid's debtor I--
Bankrupt in quadruplicate.

  Yet, despite this evil case,
  And a maiden showed me grace,
  Four-and-forty times would I
  Sing the Lovers' Litany:
  "Love like ours can never die!"


A BALLAD OF BURIAL

("Saint @Proxed's ever was the Church for peace")

If down here I chance to die,
  Solemnly I beg you take
All that is left of "I"
  To the Hills for old sake's sake,
Pack me very thoroughly
  In the ice that used to slake
Pegs I drank when I was dry--
  This observe for old sake's sake.

To the railway station hie,
  There a single ticket take
For Umballa--goods-train--I
  Shall not mind delay or shake.

I shall rest contentedly
  Spite of clamor coolies make;
Thus in state and dignity
  Send me up for old sake's sake.

Next the sleepy Babu wake,
  Book a Kalka van "for four."
Few, I think, will care to make
  Journeys with me any more
As they used to do of yore.

  I shall need a "special" break--
Thing I never took before--
  Get me one for old sake's sake.

After that--arrangements make.

  No hotel will take me in,
And a bullock's back would break
  'Neath the teak and leaden skin
Tonga ropes are frail and thin,
  Or, did I a back-seat take,
In a tonga I might spin,--
  Do your best for old sake's sake.

After that--your work is done.

  Recollect a Padre must
Mourn the dear departed one--
  Throw the ashes and the dust.

Don't go down at once. I trust
  You will find excuse to "snake
Three days' casual on the bust."
  Get your fun for old sake's sake.

I could never stand the Plains.
  Think of blazing June and May
Think of those September rains
  Yearly till the Judgment Day!
I should never rest in peace,
  I should sweat and lie awake.

Rail me then, on my decease,
  To the Hills for old sake's sake.


DIVIDED DESTINIES

It was an artless Bandar, and he danced upon a pine,
And much I wondered how he lived, and where the beast might dine,
And many, many other things, till, o'er my morning smoke,
I slept the sleep of idleness and dreamt that Bandar spoke.

He said: "O man of many clothes! Sad crawler on the Hills!
Observe, I know not Ranken's shop, nor Ranken's monthly bills;
I take no heed to trousers or the coats that you call dress;
Nor am I plagued with little cards for little drinks at Mess.

"I steal the bunnia's grain at morn, at noon and eventide,
(For he is fat and I am spare), I roam the mountain side,
I follow no man's carriage, and no, never in my life
Have I flirted at Peliti's with another Bandar's wife.

"O man of futile fopperies--unnecessary wraps;
I own no ponies in the hills, I drive no tall-wheeled traps;
I buy me not twelve-button gloves, 'short-sixes' eke, or rings,
Nor do I waste at Hamilton's my wealth on 'pretty things.'

"I quarrel with my wife at home, we never fight abroad;
But Mrs. B. has grasped the fact I am her only lord.

I never heard of fever--dumps nor debts depress my soul;
And I pity and despise you!" Here he poached my breakfast-roll.

His hide was very mangy, and his face was very red,
And ever and anon he scratched with energy his head.
His manners were not always nice, but how my spirit cried
To be an artless Bandar loose upon the mountain side!

So I answered: "Gentle Bandar, an inscrutable Decree
Makes thee a gleesome fleasome Thou, and me a wretched Me.
Go! Depart in peace, my brother, to thy home amid the pine;
Yet forget not once a mortal wished to change his lot for thine."


THE MASQUE OF PLENTY

Argument.--The Indian Government being minded to discover the economic
condition of their lands, sent a Committee to inquire into it; and saw that it
was good.

Scene.--The wooded heights of Simla. The Incarnation of
the Government of India in the raiment of the Angel of Plenty
sings, to pianoforte accompaniment:--

"How sweet is the shepherd's sweet life!
  From the dawn to the even he strays--
And his tongue shall be filled with praise.

  (adagio dim.) Filled with praise!"

(largendo con sp.) Now this is the position,
                  Go make an inquisition
                  Into their real condition
                    As swiftly as ye may.

              (p) Ay, paint our swarthy billions
                  The richest of vermillions
                  Ere two well-led cotillions
                    Have danced themselves away.

Turkish Patrol, as able and intelligent Investigators wind
                down the Himalayas:--

What is the state of the Nation? What is its occupation?
Hi! get along, get along, get along--lend us the information!
(dim.) Census the byle and the yabu--capture a first-class Babu,
  Set him to file Gazetteers--Gazetteers . . .

                (ff) What is the state of the Nation, etc., etc.

Interlude, from Nowhere in Particular, to stringed and Oriental
instruments.

Our cattle reel beneath the yoke they bear--
  The earth is iron and the skies are brass--
And faint with fervour of the flaming air
  The languid hours pass.

The well is dry beneath the village tree--
  The young wheat withers ere it reach a span,
And belts of blinding sand show cruelly
  Where once the river ran.

Pray, brothers, pray, but to no earthly King--
  Lift up your hands above the blighted grain,
Look westward--if they please, the Gods shall bring
  Their mercy with the rain.

Look westward--bears the blue no brown cloud-bank?
  Nay, it is written--wherefore should we fly?
On our own field and by our cattle's flank
  Lie down, lie down to die!

                        Semi-Chorus

        By the plumed heads of Kings
                        Waving high,
        Where the tall corn springs
                        O'er the dead.

        If they rust or rot we die,
        If they ripen we are fed.

        Very mighty is the power of our Kings!

Triumphal return to Simla of the Investigators, attired after
  the manner of Dionysus, leading a pet tiger-cub in wreaths
  of rhubarb-leaves, symbolical of India under medical treatment.

  They sing:--

We have seen, we have written--behold it, the proof of our manifold toil!
In their hosts they assembled and told it--the tale of the Sons of the Soil.

We have said of the Sickness--"Where is it?"--and of Death--"It is far from
our ken,"--
We have paid a particular visit to the affluent children of men.

We have trodden the mart and the well-curb--we have stooped to the field and
the byre;
And the King may the forces of Hell curb for the People have all they desire!

        Castanets and step-dance:--

Oh, the dom and the mag and the thakur and the thag,
  And the nat and the brinjaree,
And the bunnia and the ryot are as happy and as quiet
And as plump as they can be!

Yes, the jain and the jat in his stucco-fronted hut,
  And the bounding bazugar,
By the favour of the King, are as fat as anything,
  They are--they are--they are!

Recitative, Government of India, with white satin wings  and electro-plated    
   harp:--

How beautiful upon the Mountains--in peace reclining,
Thus to be assured that our people are unanimously dining.

And though there are places not so blessed as others in natural advantages,
which, after all, was only to be expected,
Proud and glad are we to congratulate you upon the work you have thus ably
effected.

(Cres.) How be-ewtiful upon the Mountains!

Hired Band,  brasses only, full chorus:--

        God bless the Squire
        And all his rich relations
        Who teach us poor people
        We eat our proper rations--
                We eat our proper rations,
                In spite of inundations,
                Malarial exhalations,
                And casual starvations,
        We have, we have, they say we have--
        We have our proper rations!

Chorus of the Crystallised Facts

        Before the beginning of years
        There came to the rule of the State
        Men with a pair of shears,
        Men with an Estimate--
        Strachey with Muir for leaven,
        Lytton with locks that fell,
        Ripon fooling with Heaven,
        And Temple riding like H--ll!
        And the bigots took in hand
        Cess and the falling of rain,
        And the measure of sifted sand
        The dealer puts in the grain--
        Imports by land and sea,
        To uttermost decimal worth,
        And registration--free--
        In the houses of death and of birth.

        And fashioned with pens and paper,
        And fashioned in black and white,
        With Life for a flickering taper
        And Death for a blazing light--
        With the Armed and the Civil Power,
        That his strength might endure for a span--
        From Adam's Bridge to Peshawur,
        The Much Administered Man.

        In the towns of the North and the East,
        They gathered as unto rule,
        They bade him starve his priest
        And send his children to school.

        Railways and roads they wrought,
        For the needs of the soil within;
        A time to squabble in court,
        A time to bear and to grin.

        And gave him peace in his ways,
        Jails--and Police to fight,
        Justice--at length of days,
        And Right--and Might in the Right.

        His speech is of mortgaged bedding,
        On his kine he borrows yet,
        At his heart is his daughter's wedding,
        In his eye foreknowledge of debt.

        He eats and hath indigestion,
        He toils and he may not stop;
        His life is a long-drawn question
        Between a crop and a crop.

     
THE MARE'S NEST

Jane Austen Beecher Stowe de Rouse
  Was good beyond all earthly need;
But, on the other hand, her spouse
  Was very, very bad indeed.

He smoked cigars, called churches slow,
And raced--but this she did not know.

For Belial Machiavelli kept
  The little fact a secret, and,
Though o'er his minor sins she wept,
  Jane Austen did not understand
That Lilly--thirteen-two and bay
Absorbed one-half her husband's pay.

She was so good, she made him worse;
  (Some women are like this, I think;)
He taught her parrot how to curse,
  Her Assam monkey how to drink.

He vexed her righteous soul until
She went up, and he went down hill.

Then came the crisis, strange to say,
  Which turned a good wife to a better.

A telegraphic peon, one day,
  Brought her--now, had it been a letter
For Belial Machiavelli, I
Know Jane would just have let it lie.

But 'twas a telegram instead,
  Marked "urgent," and her duty plain
To open it. Jane Austen read:
  "Your Lilly's got a cough again.
Can't understand why she is kept
At your expense." Jane Austen wept.

It was a misdirected wire.
  Her husband was at Shaitanpore.
She spread her anger, hot as fire,
  Through six thin foreign sheets or more.

Sent off that letter, wrote another
To her solicitor--and mother.

Then Belial Machiavelli saw
  Her error and, I trust, his own,
Wired to the minion of the Law,
  And traveled wifeward--not alone.

For Lilly--thirteen-two and bay--
Came in a horse-box all the way.

There was a scene--a weep or two--
  With many kisses. Austen Jane
Rode Lilly all the season through,
  And never opened wires again.

She races now with Belial. This
Is very sad, but so it is.


POSSIBILITIES

Ay, lay him 'neath the Simla pine--
  A fortnight fully to be missed,
  Behold, we lose our fourth at whist,
A chair is vacant where we dine.

His place forgets him; other men
  Have bought his ponies, guns, and traps.
  His fortune is the Great Perhaps
And that cool rest-house down the glen,

Whence he shall hear, as spirits may,
  Our mundane revel on the height,
  Shall watch each flashing 'rickshaw-light
Sweep on to dinner, dance, and play.

Benmore shall woo him to the ball
  With lighted rooms and braying band;
  And he shall hear and understand
"Dream Faces" better than us all.

For, think you, as the vapours flee
  Across Sanjaolie after rain,
  His soul may climb the hill again
To each field of victory.

Unseen, who women held so dear,
  The strong man's yearning to his kind
  Shall shake at most the window-blind,
Or dull awhile the card-room's cheer.

@In his own place of power unknown,
  His Light o' Love another's flame,
And he an alien and alone!

Yet may he meet with many a friend--
  Shrewd shadows, lingering long unseen
  Among us when "God save the Queen"
Shows even "extras" have an end.

And, when we leave the heated room,
  And, when at four the lights expire,
  The crew shall gather round the fire
And mock our laughter in the gloom;

Talk as we talked, and they ere death--
  Flirt wanly, dance in ghostly-wise,
  With ghosts of tunes for melodies,
And vanish at the morning's breath.


CHRISTMAS IN INDIA

Dim dawn behind the tamarisks--the sky is saffron-yellow--
  As the women in the village grind the corn,
And the parrots seek the riverside, each calling to his fellow
  That the Day, the staring Easter Day is born.

    Oh the white dust on the highway! Oh the stenches in the byway!
      Oh the clammy fog that hovers o'er the earth;
    And at Home they're making merry 'neath the white and scarlet berry--
      What part have India's exiles in their mirth?

Full day behind the tamarisks--the sky is blue and staring--
  As the cattle crawl afield beneath the yoke,
And they bear One o'er the field-path, who is past all hope or caring,
  To the ghat below the curling wreaths of smoke.

    Call on Rama, going slowly, as ye bear a brother lowly--
      Call on Rama--he may hear, perhaps, your voice!
    With our hymn-books and our psalters we appeal to other altars,
      And today we bid "good Christian men rejoice!"

High noon behind the tamarisks--the sun is hot above us--
  As at Home the Christmas Day is breaking wan.
They will drink our healths at dinner--those who tell us how they love us,
  And forget us till another year be gone!

    Oh the toil that knows no breaking! Oh the Heimweh, ceaseless, aching!
      Oh the black dividing Sea and alien Plain!
    Youth was cheap--wherefore we sold it.
      Gold was good--we hoped to hold it,
    And today we know the fulness of our gain.

Grey dusk behind the tamarisks--the parrots fly together--
  As the sun is sinking slowly over Home;
And his last ray seems to mock us shackled in a lifelong tether.
  That drags us back howe'er so far we roam.

    Hard her service, poor her payment--she is ancient, tattered raiment--
      India, she the grim Stepmother of our kind.
    If a year of life be lent her, if her temple's shrine we enter,
      The door is shut--we may not look behind.

Black night behind the tamarisks--the owls begin their chorus--
  As the conches from the temple scream and bray.
With the fruitless years behind us, and the hopeless years before us,
  Let us honor, O my brother, Christmas Day!

    Call a truce, then, to our labors--let us feast with friends and
neighbors,
      And be merry as the custom of our caste;
    For if "faint and forced the laughter," and if sadness follow after,
      We are richer by one mocking Christmas past.


PAGETT, M.P.

The toad beneath the harrow knows
Exactly where each tooth-point goes.
The butterfly upon the road
Preaches contentment to that toad.

Pagett, M.P., was a liar, and a fluent liar therewith--
He spoke of the heat of India as the "Asian Solar Myth";
Came on a four months' visit, to "study the East," in November,
And I got him to sign an agreement vowing to stay till September.

March came in with the koil. Pagett was cool and gay,
Called me a "bloated Brahmin," talked of my "princely pay."
March went out with the roses. "Where is your heat?" said he.
"Coming," said I to Pagett, "Skittles!" said Pagett, M.P.

April began with the punkah, coolies, and prickly-heat,--
Pagett was dear to mosquitoes, sandflies found him a treat.
He grew speckled and mumpy--hammered, I grieve to say,
Aryan brothers who fanned him, in an illiberal way.

May set in with a dust-storm,--Pagett went down with the sun.
All the delights of the season tickled him one by one.
Imprimis--ten day's "liver"--due to his drinking beer;
Later, a dose of fever--slight, but he called it severe.

Dysent'ry touched him in June, after the Chota Bursat--
Lowered his portly person--made him yearn to depart.
He didn't call me a "Brahmin," or "bloated," or "overpaid,"
But seemed to think it a wonder that any one stayed.

July was a trifle unhealthy,--Pagett was ill with fear.
'Called it the "Cholera Morbus," hinted that life was dear.
He babbled of "Eastern Exile," and mentioned his home with tears;
But I haven't seen my children for close upon seven years.

We reached a hundred and twenty once in the Court at noon,
(I've mentioned Pagett was portly) Pagett, went off in a swoon.
That was an end to the business; Pagett, the perjured, fled
With a practical, working knowledge of "Solar Myths" in his head.

And I laughed as I drove from the station, but the mirth died out on my lips
As I thought of the fools like Pagett who write of their "Eastern trips,"
And the sneers of the traveled idiots who duly misgovern the land,
And I prayed to the Lord to deliver another one into my hand.


THE SONG OF THE WOMEN

How shall she know the worship we would do her?
  The walls are high, and she is very far.
How shall the woman's message reach unto her
  Above the tumult of the packed bazaar?
    Free wind of March, against the lattice blowing,
    Bear thou our thanks, lest she depart unknowing.

Go forth across the fields we may not roam in,
  Go forth beyond the trees that rim the city,
To whatsoe'er fair place she hath her home in,
  Who dowered us with wealth of love and pity.
    Out of our shadow pass, and seek her singing--
    "I have no gifts but Love alone for bringing."

Say that we be a feeble folk who greet her,
  But old in grief, and very wise in tears;
Say that we, being desolate, entreat her
  That she forget us not in after years;
    For we have seen the light, and it were grievous
    To dim that dawning if our lady leave us.

By life that ebbed with none to stanch the failing
  By Love's sad harvest garnered in the spring,
When Love in ignorance wept unavailing
  O'er young buds dead before their blossoming;
    By all the grey owl watched, the pale moon viewed,
    In past grim years, declare our gratitude!

By hands uplifted to the Gods that heard not,
  By fits that found no favor in their sight,
By faces bent above the babe that stirred not,
  By nameless horrors of the stifling night;
    By ills foredone, by peace her toils discover,
    Bid Earth be good beneath and Heaven above her!

If she have sent her servants in our pain
  If she have fought with Death and dulled his sword;
If she have given back our sick again.
  And to the breast the waking lips restored,
    Is it a little thing that she has wrought?
    Then Life and Death and Motherhood be nought.

Go forth, O wind, our message on thy wings,
  And they shall hear thee pass and bid thee speed,
In reed-roofed hut, or white-walled home of kings,
  Who have been helpen by her in their need.

    All spring shall give thee fragrance, and the wheat
    Shall be a tasselled floorcloth to thy feet.

Haste, for our hearts are with thee, take no rest!
  Loud-voiced ambassador, from sea to sea
Proclaim the blessing, manifold, confessed.
  Of those in darkness by her hand set free.

    Then very softly to her presence move,
    And whisper: "Lady, lo, they know and love!"


A BALLAD OF JAKKO HILL

One moment bid the horses wait,
  Since tiffin is not laid till three,
Below the upward path and straight
  You climbed a year ago with me.

Love came upon us suddenly
  And loosed--an idle hour to kill--
A headless, armless armory
  That smote us both on Jakko Hill.

Ah Heaven! we would wait and wait
  Through Time and to Eternity!
Ah Heaven! we could conquer Fate
  With more than Godlike constancy
I cut the date upon a tree--
  Here stand the clumsy figures still:
"10-7-85, A.D."
  Damp with the mist of Jakko Hill.

What came of high resolve and great,
  And until Death fidelity!
Whose horse is waiting at your gate?
  Whose 'rickshaw-wheels ride over me?
No Saint's, I swear; and--let me see
  Tonight what names your programme fill--
We drift asunder merrily,
  As drifts the mist on Jakko Hill.

                L'ENVOI.

Princess, behold our ancient state
  Has clean departed; and we see
'Twas Idleness we took for Fate
  That bound light bonds on you and me.

Amen! Here ends the comedy
  Where it began in all good will;
Since Love and Leave together flee
  As driven mist on Jakko Hill!


THE PLEA OF THE SIMLA DANCERS

    Too late, alas! the song
    To remedy the wrong;--
The rooms are taken from us, swept and
      garnished for their fate.
    But these tear-besprinkled pages
    Shall attest to future ages
That we cried against the crime of it--
      too late, alas! too late!

"What have we ever done to bear this grudge?"
  Was there no room save only in Benmore
For docket, duftar, and for office drudge,
  That you usurp our smoothest dancing floor?
Must babus do their work on polished teak?
  Are ball-rooms fittest for the ink you spill?
Was there no other cheaper house to seek?
  You might have left them all at Strawberry Hill.

We never harmed you! Innocent our guise,
  Dainty our shining feet, our voices low;
And we revolved to divers melodies,
  And we were happy but a year ago.

Tonight, the moon that watched our lightsome wiles--
  That beamed upon us through the deodars--
Is wan with gazing on official files,
  And desecrating desks disgust the stars.

Nay! by the memory of tuneful nights--
  Nay! by the witchery of flying feet--
Nay! by the glamour of foredone delights--
  By all things merry, musical, and meet--
By wine that sparkled, and by sparkling eyes--
  By wailing waltz--by reckless galop's strain--
By dim verandas and by soft replies,
  Give us our ravished ball-room back again!

Or--hearken to the curse we lay on you!
  The ghosts of waltzes shall perplex your brain,
And murmurs of past merriment pursue
  Your 'wildered clerks that they indite in vain;
And when you count your poor Provincial millions,
  The only figures that your pen shall frame
Shall be the figures of dear, dear cotillions
  Danced out in tumult long before you came.

Yea! "See Saw" shall upset your estimates,
  "Dream Faces" shall your heavy heads bemuse,
Because your hand, unheeding, desecrates
  Our temple; fit for higher, worthier use.
And all the long verandas, eloquent
  With echoes of a score of Simla years,
Shall plague you with unbidden sentiment--
  Babbling of kisses, laughter, love, and tears.

So shall you mazed amid old memories stand,
  So shall you toil, and shall accomplish nought,
And ever in your ears a phantom Band
  Shall blare away the staid official thought.

Wherefore--and ere this awful curse he spoken,
  Cast out your swarthy sacrilegious train,
And give--ere dancing cease and hearts be broken--
  Give us our ravished ball-room back again!


THE BALLAD OF FISHER'S BOARDING-HOUSE

        That night, when through the mooring-chains
            The wide-eyed corpse rolled free,
          To blunder down by Garden Reach
            And rot at Kedgeree,
          The tale the Hughli told the shoal
            The lean shoal told to me.

'T was Fultah Fisher's boarding-house,
  Where sailor-men reside,
And there were men of all the ports
  From Mississip to Clyde,
And regally they spat and smoked,
  And fearsomely they lied.

They lied about the purple Sea
  That gave them scanty bread,
They lied about the Earth beneath,
  The Heavens overhead,
For they had looked too often on
  Black rum when that was red.

They told their tales of wreck and wrong,
  Of shame and lust and fraud,
They backed their toughest statements with
  The Brimstone of the Lord,
And crackling oaths went to and fro
  Across the fist-banged board.

And there was Hans the blue-eyed Dane,
  Bull-throated, bare of arm,
Who carried on his hairy chest
  The maid Ultruda's charm--
The little silver crucifix
  That keeps a man from harm.

And there was Jake Without-the-Ears,
  And Pamba the Malay,
And Carboy Gin the Guinea cook,
  And Luz from Vigo Bay,
And Honest Jack who sold them slops
  And harvested their pay.

And there was Salem Hardieker,
  A lean Bostonian he--
Russ, German, English, Halfbreed, Finn,
  Yank, Dane, and Portuguee,
At Fultah Fisher's boarding-house
  They rested from the sea.

Now Anne of Austria shared their drinks,
  Collinga knew her fame,
From Tarnau in Galicia
  To Juan Bazaar she came,
To eat the bread of infamy
  And take the wage of shame.

She held a dozen men to heel--
  Rich spoil of war was hers,
In hose and gown and ring and chain,
  From twenty mariners,
And, by Port Law, that week, men called
  her Salem Hardieker's.

But seamen learnt--what landsmen know--
  That neither gifts nor gain
Can hold a winking Light o' Love
  Or Fancy's flight restrain,
When Anne of Austria rolled her eyes
  On Hans the blue-eyed Dane.

Since Life is strife, and strife means knife,
  From Howrah to the Bay,
And he may die before the dawn
  Who liquored out the day,
In Fultah Fisher's boarding-house
  We woo while yet we may.

But cold was Hans the blue-eyed Dane,
  Bull-throated, bare of arm,
And laughter shook the chest beneath
  The maid Ultruda's charm--
The little silver crucifix
  That keeps a man from harm.

"You speak to Salem Hardieker;
  "You was his girl, I know.

"I ship mineselfs tomorrow, see,
  "Und round the Skaw we go,
"South, down the Cattegat, by Hjelm,
  "To Besser in Saro."

When love rejected turns to hate,
  All ill betide the man.

"You speak to Salem Hardieker"--
  She spoke as woman can.
A scream--a sob--"He called me--names!"
  And then the fray began.

An oath from Salem Hardieker,
  A shriek upon the stairs,
A dance of shadows on the wall,
  A knife-thrust unawares--
And Hans came down, as cattle drop,
  Across the broken chairs.
*     *      *        *       *       *

In Anne of Austria's trembling hands
  The weary head fell low:--
"I ship mineselfs tomorrow, straight
  "For Besser in Saro;
"Und there Ultruda comes to me
  "At Easter, und I go--

"South, down the Cattegat--What's here?
  "There--are--no--lights--to guide!"
The mutter ceased, the spirit passed,
  And Anne of Austria cried
In Fultah Fisher's boarding-house
  When Hans the mighty died.

Thus slew they Hans the blue-eyed Dane,
  Bull-throated, bare of arm,
But Anne of Austria looted first
  The maid Ultruda's charm--
The little silver crucifix
  That keeps a man from harm.


AS THE BELL CLINKS

As I left the Halls at Lumley, rose the vision of a comely
Maid last season worshipped dumbly, watched with fervor from afar;
And I wondered idly, blindly, if the maid would greet me kindly.

That was all--the rest was settled by the clinking tonga-bar.
Yea, my life and hers were coupled by the tonga coupling-bar.

For my misty meditation, at the second changin'-station,
Suffered sudden dislocation, fled before the tuneless jar
Of a Wagner obbligato, scherzo, doublehand staccato,
Played on either pony's saddle by the clacking tonga-bar--

Played with human speech, I fancied, by the jigging, jolting bar.

"She was sweet," thought I, "last season, but 'twere surely wild unreason
Such tiny hope to freeze on as was offered by my Star,
When she whispered, something sadly: 'I--we feel your going badly!'"
"And you let the chance escape you?" rapped the rattling tonga-bar.

"What a chance and what an idiot!" clicked the vicious tonga-bar.

Heart of man--oh, heart of putty! Had I gone by Kakahutti,
On the old Hill-road and rutty, I had 'scaped that fatal car.
But his fortune each must bide by, so I watched the milestones slide by,
To "You call on Her tomorrow!"--fugue with cymbals by the bar--

"You must call on Her tomorrow!"--post-horn gallop by the bar.

Yet a further stage my goal on--we were whirling down to Solon,
With a double lurch and roll on, best foot foremost, ganz und gar--
"She was very sweet," I hinted. "If a kiss had been imprinted?"--
"'Would ha' saved a world of trouble!" clashed the busy tonga-bar.

"'Been accepted or rejected!" banged and clanged the tonga-bar.

Then a notion wild and daring, 'spite the income tax's paring,
And a hasty thought of sharing--less than many incomes are,
Made me put a question private, you can guess what I would drive at.
"You must work the sum to prove it," clanked the careless tonga-bar.

"Simple Rule of Two will prove it," lilted back the tonga-bar.

It was under Khyraghaut I mused. "Suppose the maid be haughty--
(There are lovers rich--and rotty)--wait some wealthy Avatar?
Answer monitor untiring, 'twixt the ponies twain perspiring!"
"Faint heart never won fair lady," creaked the straining tonga-bar.

"Can I tell you ere you ask Her?" pounded slow the tonga-bar.

Last, the Tara Devi turning showed the lights of Simla burning,
Lit my little lazy yearning to a fiercer flame by far.

As below the Mall we jingled, through my very heart it tingled--
Did the iterated order of the threshing tonga-bar--

"Try your luck--you can't do better!" twanged the loosened tonga-bar.


AN OLD SONG

So long as 'neath the Kalka hills
  The tonga-horn shall ring,
So long as down the Solon dip
  The hard-held ponies swing,
So long as Tara Devi sees
  The lights of Simla town,
So long as Pleasure calls us up,
  Or Duty drives us down,
    If you love me as I love you
    What pair so happy as we two?

So long as Aces take the King,
  Or backers take the bet,
So long as debt leads men to wed,
  Or marriage leads to debt,
So long as little luncheons, Love,
  And scandal hold their vogue,
While there is sport at Annandale
  Or whisky at Jutogh,
    If you love me as I love you
    What knife can cut our love in two?

So long as down the rocking floor
  The raving polka spins,
So long as Kitchen Lancers spur
  The maddened violins,
So long as through the whirling smoke
  We hear the oft-told tale--
"Twelve hundred in the Lotteries,"
  And Whatshername for sale?
    If you love me as I love you
    We'll play the game and win it too.

So long as Lust or Lucre tempt
  Straight riders from the course,
So long as with each drink we pour
  Black brewage of Remorse,
So long as those unloaded guns
  We keep beside the bed,
Blow off, by obvious accident,
  The lucky owner's head,
    If you love me as I love you
    What can Life kill or Death undo?

So long as Death 'twixt dance and dance
  Chills best and bravest blood,
And drops the reckless rider down
  The rotten, rain-soaked khud,
So long as rumours from the North
  Make loving wives afraid,
So long as Burma takes the boy
  Or typhoid kills the maid,
    If you love me as I love you
    What knife can cut our love in two?

By all that lights our daily life
  Or works our lifelong woe,
From Boileaugunge to Simla Downs
  And those grim glades below,
Where, heedless of the flying hoof
  And clamour overhead,
Sleep, with the grey langur for guard
  Our very scornful Dead,
    If you love me as I love you
    All Earth is servant to us two!

By Docket, Billetdoux, and File,
  By Mountain, Cliff, and Fir,
By Fan and Sword and Office-box,
  By Corset, Plume, and Spur
By Riot, Revel, Waltz, and War,
  By Women, Work, and Bills,
By all the life that fizzes in
  The everlasting Hills,
    If you love me as I love you
    What pair so happy as we two?


CERTAIN MAXIMS OF HAFIZ

   I.
If It be pleasant to look on, stalled in the packed serai,
Does not the Young Man try Its temper and pace ere he buy?
If She be pleasant to look on, what does the Young Man say?
"Lo! She is pleasant to look on, give Her to me today!"

   II.
Yea, though a Kafir die, to him is remitted Jehannum
If he borrowed in life from a native at sixty per cent. per annum.

   III.
Blister we not for bursati? So when the heart is vexed,
The pain of one maiden's refusal is drowned in the pain of the next.

   IV.
The temper of chums, the love of your wife, and a new piano's tune--
Which of the three will you trust at the end of an Indian June?

   V.
Who are the rulers of Ind--to whom shall we bow the knee?
Make your peace with the women, and men will make you L. G.

   VI.
Does the woodpecker flit round the young ferash? 
Does grass clothe a new-built wall?
Is she under thirty, the woman who holds a boy in her thrall?

   VII.
If She grow suddenly gracious--reflect. Is it all for thee?
The black-buck is stalked through the bullock, and Man through jealousy.

   VIII.
Seek not for favor of women. So shall you find it indeed.
Does not the boar break cover just when you're lighting a weed?

   IX.
If He play, being young and unskilful, for shekels of silver and gold,
Take his money, my son, praising Allah. The kid was ordained to be sold.

   X.
With a "weed" among men or horses verily this is the best,
That you work him in office or dog-cart lightly--but give him no rest.

   XI.
Pleasant the snaffle of Courtship, improving the manners and carriage;
But the colt who is wise will abstain from the terrible thorn-bit of Marriage.

   XII.
As the thriftless gold of the babul, so is the gold that we spend
On a derby Sweep, or our neighbor's wife, or the horse that we buy from a
friend.

   XIII.
The ways of man with a maid be strange, yet simple and tame
To the ways of a man with a horse, when selling or racing that same.

   XIV.
In public Her face turneth to thee, and pleasant Her smile when ye meet.
It is ill. The cold rocks of El-Gidar smile thus on the waves at their feet.

In public Her face is averted, with anger. She nameth thy name.
It is well. Was there ever a loser content with the loss of the game?

   XV.
If She have spoken a word, remember thy lips are sealed,
And the Brand of the Dog is upon him by whom is the secret revealed.

If She have written a letter, delay not an instant, but burn it.
Tear it to pieces, O Fool, and the wind to her mate shall return it!

If there be trouble to Herward, and a lie of the blackest can clear,
Lie, while thy lips can move or a man is alive to hear.
     
   XVI.
My Son, if a maiden deny thee and scufflingly bid thee give o'er,
Yet lip meets with lip at the last word--get out! 
  She has been there before.
They are pecked on the ear and the chin and the nose who are lacking in lore.

   XVII.
If we fall in the race, though we win, the hoof-slide is scarred on the
course.
Though Allah and Earth pardon Sin, remaineth forever Remorse.

   XVIII.
"By all I am misunderstood!" if the Matron shall say, or the Maid:
"Alas! I do not understand," my son, be thou nowise afraid.

In vain in the sight of the Bird is the net of the Fowler displayed.

   XIX.
My son, if I, Hafiz, the father, take hold of thy knees in my pain,
Demanding thy name on stamped paper, one day or one hour--refrain.

Are the links of thy fetters so light that thou cravest another man's chain?


THE GRAVE OF THE HUNDRED HEAD

There's a widow in sleepy Chester
  Who weeps for her only son;
There's a grave on the Pabeng River,
  A grave that the Burmans shun,
And there's Subadar Prag Tewarri
  Who tells how the work was done.

A Snider squibbed in the jungle,
  Somebody laughed and fled,
And the men of the First Shikaris
  Picked up their Subaltern dead,
With a big blue mark in his forehead
  And the back blown out of his head.

Subadar Prag Tewarri,
  Jemadar Hira Lal,
Took command of the party,
  Twenty rifles in all,
Marched them down to the river
  As the day was beginning to fall.

They buried the boy by the river,
  A blanket over his face--
They wept for their dead Lieutenant,
  The men of an alien race--
They made a samadh in his honor,
  A mark for his resting-place.

For they swore by the Holy Water,
  They swore by the salt they ate,
That the soul of Lieutenant Eshmitt Sahib
  Should go to his God in state;
With fifty file of Burman
  To open him Heaven's gate.

The men of the First Shikaris
  Marched till the break of day,
Till they came to the rebel village,
  The village of Pabengmay--
A jingal covered the clearing,
  Calthrops hampered the way.

Subadar Prag Tewarri,
  Bidding them load with ball,
Halted a dozen rifles
  Under the village wall;
Sent out a flanking-party
  With Jemadar Hira Lal.

The men of the First Shikaris
  Shouted and smote and slew,
Turning the grinning jingal
  On to the howling crew.
The Jemadar's flanking-party
  Butchered the folk who flew.

Long was the morn of slaughter,
  Long was the list of slain,
Five score heads were taken,
  Five score heads and twain;
And the men of the First Shikaris
  Went back to their grave again,

Each man bearing a basket
  Red as his palms that day,
Red as the blazing village--
  The village of Pabengmay,
And the "drip-drip-drip" from the baskets
  Reddened the grass by the way.

They made a pile of their trophies
  High as a tall man's chin,
Head upon head distorted,
  Set in a sightless grin,
Anger and pain and terror
  Stamped on the smoke-scorched skin.

Subadar Prag Tewarri
  Put the head of the Boh
On the top of the mound of triumph,
  The head of his son below,
With the sword and the peacock-banner
  That the world might behold and know.

Thus the samadh was perfect,
  Thus was the lesson plain
Of the wrath of the First Shikaris--
  The price of a white man slain;
And the men of the First Shikaris
  Went back into camp again.

Then a silence came to the river,
  A hush fell over the shore,
And Bohs that were brave departed,
  And Sniders squibbed no more;
    For the Burmans said
    That a kullah's head
Must be paid for with heads five score.

There's a widow in sleepy Chester
  Who weeps for her only son;
There's a grave on the Pabeng River,
  A grave that the Burmans shun,
And there's Subadar Prag Tewarri
  Who tells how the work was done.


THE MOON OF OTHER DAYS

Beneath the deep veranda's shade,
  When bats begin to fly,
I sit me down and watch--alas!--
  Another evening die.

Blood-red behind the sere ferash
  She rises through the haze.
Sainted Diana! can that be
  The Moon of Other Days?

Ah! shade of little Kitty Smith,
  Sweet Saint of Kensington!
Say, was it ever thus at Home
  The Moon of August shone,
When arm in arm we wandered long
  Through Putney's evening haze,
And Hammersmith was Heaven beneath
  The Moon of Other Days?

But Wandle's stream is Sutlej now,
  And Putney's evening haze
The dust that half a hundred kine
  Before my window raise.
Unkempt, unclean, athwart the mist
  The seething city looms,
In place of Putney's golden gorse
  The sickly babul blooms.

Glare down, old Hecate, through the dust,
  And bid the pie-dog yell,
Draw from the drain its typhoid-germ,
  From each bazaar its smell;
Yea, suck the fever from the tank
  And sap my strength therewith:
Thank Heaven, you show a smiling face
  To little Kitty Smith!


THE OVERLAND MAIL
(Foot-Service to the Hills)

In the name of the Empress of India, make way,
  O Lords of the Jungle, wherever you roam.
The woods are astir at the close of the day--
  We exiles are waiting for letters from Home.
Let the robber retreat--let the tiger turn tail--
In the Name of the Empress, the Overland Mail!

With a jingle of bells as the dusk gathers in,
  He turns to the foot-path that heads up the hill--
The bags on his back and a cloth round his chin,
  And, tucked in his waist-belt, the Post Office bill:
"Despatched on this date, as received by the rail,
Per runner, two bags of the Overland Mail."

Is the torrent in spate? He must ford it or swim.
  Has the rain wrecked the road? He must climb by the cliff.
Does the tempest cry "Halt"? What are tempests to him?
  The Service admits not a "but" or and "if."
While the breath's in his mouth, he must bear without fail,
In the Name of the Empress, the Overland Mail.

From aloe to rose-oak, from rose-oak to fir,
  From level to upland, from upland to crest,
From rice-field to rock-ridge, from rock-ridge to spur,
  Fly the soft sandalled feet, strains the brawny brown chest.
From rail to ravine--to the peak from the vale--
Up, up through the night goes the Overland Mail.

There's a speck on the hillside, a dot on the road--
  A jingle of bells on the foot-path below--
There's a scuffle above in the monkey's abode--
  The world is awake, and the clouds are aglow.

For the great Sun himself must attend to the hail:
"In the name of the Empress the Overland Mail!"


WHAT THE PEOPLE SAID
June 21st, 1887

By the well, where the bullocks go
Silent and blind and slow--
By the field where the young corn dies
In the face of the sultry skies,
They have heard, as the dull Earth hears
The voice of the wind of an hour,
The sound of the Great Queen's voice:
"My God hath given me years,
Hath granted dominion and power:
And I bid you, O Land, rejoice."

And the ploughman settles the share
More deep in the grudging clod;
For he saith: "The wheat is my care,
And the rest is the will of God.

He sent the Mahratta spear
As He sendeth the rain,
And the Mlech, in the fated year,
Broke the spear in twain.

And was broken in turn. Who knows
How our Lords make strife?
It is good that the young wheat grows,
For the bread is Life."

Then, far and near, as the twilight drew,
Hissed up to the scornful dark
Great serpents, blazing, of red and blue,
That rose and faded, and rose anew.

That the Land might wonder and mark
"Today is a day of days," they said,
"Make merry, O People, all!"
And the Ploughman listened and bowed his head:
"Today and tomorrow God's will," he said,
As he trimmed the lamps on the wall.

"He sendeth us years that are good,
As He sendeth the dearth,
He giveth to each man his food,
Or Her food to the Earth.

Our Kings and our Queens are afar--
On their peoples be peace--
God bringeth the rain to the Bar,
That our cattle increase."

And the Ploughman settled the share
More deep in the sun-dried clod:
"Mogul Mahratta, and Mlech from the North,
And White Queen over the Seas--
God raiseth them up and driveth them forth
As the dust of the ploughshare flies in the breeze;
But the wheat and the cattle are all my care,
And the rest is the will of God."


THE UNDERTAKER'S HORSE

"To-tschin-shu is condemned to death.
How can he drink tea with the Executioner?"
Japanese Proverb.

The eldest son bestrides him,
And the pretty daughter rides him,
And I meet him oft o' mornings on the Course;
And there kindles in my bosom
An emotion chill and gruesome
As I canter past the Undertaker's Horse.

Neither shies he nor is restive,
But a hideously suggestive
Trot, professional and placid, he affects;
And the cadence of his hoof-beats
To my mind this grim reproof beats:--
"Mend your pace, my friend, I'm coming. Who's the next?"

Ah! stud-bred of ill-omen,
I have watched the strongest go--men
Of pith and might and muscle--at your heels,
Down the plantain-bordered highway,
(Heaven send it ne'er be my way!)
In a lacquered box and jetty upon wheels.

Answer, sombre beast and dreary,
Where is Brown, the young, the cheery,
Smith, the pride of all his friends and half the Force?
You were at that last dread dak
We must cover at a walk,
Bring them back to me, O Undertaker's Horse!

With your mane unhogged and flowing,
And your curious way of going,
And that businesslike black crimping of your tail,
E'en with Beauty on your back, Sir,
Pacing as a lady's hack, Sir,
What wonder when I meet you I turn pale?

It may be you wait your time, Beast,
Till I write my last bad rhyme, Beast--
Quit the sunlight, cut the rhyming, drop the glass--
Follow after with the others,
Where some dusky heathen smothers
Us with marigolds in lieu of English grass.

Or, perchance, in years to follow,
I shall watch your plump sides hollow,
See Carnifex (gone lame) become a corse--
See old age at last o'erpower you,
And the Station Pack devour you,
I shall chuckle then, O Undertaker's Horse!

But to insult, jibe, and quest, I've
Still the hideously suggestive
Trot that hammers out the unrelenting text,
And I hear it hard behind me
In what place soe'er I find me:--
"'Sure to catch you sooner or later. Who's the next?"


THE FALL OF JOCK GILLESPIE

This fell when dinner-time was done--
  'Twixt the first an' the second rub--
That oor mon Jock cam' hame again
  To his rooms ahist the Club.

An' syne he laughed, an' syne he sang,
  An' syne we thocht him fou,
An' syne he trumped his partner's trick,
  An' garred his partner rue.

Then up and spake an elder mon,
  That held the Spade its Ace--
"God save the lad! Whence comes the licht
  "That wimples on his face?"

An' Jock he sniggered, an' Jock he smiled,
  An' ower the card-brim wunk:--
"I'm a' too fresh fra' the stirrup-peg,
  "May be that I am drunk."

"There's whusky brewed in Galashils
  "An' L. L. L. forbye;
"But never liquor lit the lowe
  "That keeks fra' oot your eye.

"There's a third o' hair on your dress-coat breast,
  "Aboon the heart a wee?"
"Oh! that is fra' the lang-haired Skye
  "That slobbers ower me."

"Oh! lang-haired Skyes are lovin' beasts,
  "An' terrier dogs are fair,
"But never yet was terrier born,
  "Wi' ell-lang gowden hair!

"There's a smirch o' pouther on your breast,
  "Below the left lappel?"
"Oh! that is fra' my auld cigar,
  "Whenas the stump-end fell."

"Mon Jock, ye smoke the Trichi coarse,
  "For ye are short o' cash,
"An' best Havanas couldna leave
  "Sae white an' pure an ash.

"This nicht ye stopped a story braid,
  "An' stopped it wi' a curse.
"Last nicht ye told that tale yoursel'--
  "An' capped it wi' a worse!

"Oh! we're no fou! Oh! we're no fou!
  "But plainly we can ken
"Ye're fallin', fallin' fra the band
  "O' cantie single men!"

An' it fell when sirris-shaws were sere,
  An' the nichts were lang and mirk,
In braw new breeks, wi' a gowden ring,
  Oor Jock gaed to the Kirk!


ARITHMETIC ON THE FRONTIER

A great and glorious thing it is
  To learn, for seven years or so,
The Lord knows what of that and this,
  Ere reckoned fit to face the foe--
The flying bullet down the Pass,
That whistles clear: "All flesh is grass."

Three hundred pounds per annum spent
  On making brain and body meeter
For all the murderous intent
  Comprised in "villainous saltpetre!"
And after--ask the Yusufzaies
What comes of all our 'ologies.

A scrimmage in a Border Station--
  A canter down some dark defile--
Two thousand pounds of education
  Drops to a ten-rupee jezail--
The Crammer's boast, the Squadron's pride,
Shot like a rabbit in a ride!

No proposition Euclid wrote,
  No formulae the text-books know,
Will turn the bullet from your coat,
  Or ward the tulwar's downward blow
Strike hard who cares--shoot straight who can--
The odds are on the cheaper man.

One sword-knot stolen from the camp
  Will pay for all the school expenses
Of any Kurrum Valley scamp
  Who knows no word of moods and tenses,
But, being blessed with perfect sight,
Picks off our messmates left and right.

With home-bred hordes the hillsides teem,
  The troop-ships bring us one by one,
At vast expense of time and steam,
  To slay Afridis where they run.

The "captives of our bow and spear"
Are cheap--alas! as we are dear.


THE BETROTHED

"You must choose between me and your cigar."
       --BREACH OF PROMISE CASE, CIRCA 1885.

Open the old cigar-box, get me a Cuba stout,
For things are running crossways, and Maggie and I are out.

We quarrelled about Havanas--we fought o'er a good cheroot,
And I knew she is exacting, and she says I am a brute.

Open the old cigar-box--let me consider a space;
In the soft blue veil of the vapour musing on Maggie's face.

Maggie is pretty to look at--Maggie's a loving lass,
But the prettiest cheeks must wrinkle, the truest of loves must pass.

There's peace in a Larranaga, there's calm in a Henry Clay;
But the best cigar in an hour is finished and thrown away--

Thrown away for another as perfect and ripe and brown--
But I could not throw away Maggie for fear o' the talk o' the town!

Maggie, my wife at fifty--grey and dour and old--
With never another Maggie to purchase for love or gold!

And the light of Days that have Been the dark of the Days that Are,
And Love's torch stinking and stale, like the butt of a dead cigar--

The butt of a dead cigar you are bound to keep in your pocket--
With never a new one to light tho' it's charred and black to the socket!

Open the old cigar-box--let me consider a while.
Here is a mild Manila--there is a wifely smile.

Which is the better portion--bondage bought with a ring,
Or a harem of dusky beauties, fifty tied in a string?

Counsellors cunning and silent--comforters true and tried,
And never a one of the fifty to sneer at a rival bride?

Thought in the early morning, solace in time of woes,
Peace in the hush of the twilight, balm ere my eyelids close,

This will the fifty give me, asking nought in return,
With only a Suttee's passion--to do their duty and burn.

This will the fifty give me. When they are spent and dead,
Five times other fifties shall be my servants instead.

The furrows of far-off Java, the isles of the Spanish Main,
When they hear my harem is empty will send me my brides again.

I will take no heed to their raiment, nor food for their mouths withal,
So long as the gulls are nesting, so long as the showers fall.

I will scent 'em with best vanilla, with tea will I temper their hides,
And the Moor and the Mormon shall envy who read of the tale of my brides.

For Maggie has written a letter to give me my choice between
The wee little whimpering Love and the great god Nick o' Teen.

And I have been servant of Love for barely a twelvemonth clear,
But I have been Priest of Cabanas a matter of seven year;

And the gloom of my bachelor days is flecked with the cheery light
Of stumps that I burned to Friendship and Pleasure and Work and Fight.

And I turn my eyes to the future that Maggie and I must prove,
But the only light on the marshes is the Will-o'-the-Wisp of Love.

Will it see me safe through my journey or leave me bogged in the mire?
Since a puff of tobacco can cloud it, shall I follow the fitful fire?

Open the old cigar-box--let me consider anew--
Old friends, and who is Maggie that I should abandon you?

A million surplus Maggies are willing to bear the yoke;
And a woman is only a woman, but a good Cigar is a Smoke.

Light me another Cuba--I hold to my first-sworn vows.
If Maggie will have no rival, I'll have no Maggie for Spouse!


A TALE OF TWO CITIES

Where the sober-colored cultivator smiles
    On his byles;
Where the cholera, the cyclone, and the crow
    Come and go;
Where the merchant deals in indigo and tea,
    Hides and ghi;
Where the Babu drops inflammatory hints
    In his prints;
Stands a City--Charnock chose it--packed away
    Near a Bay--
By the Sewage rendered fetid, by the sewer
    Made impure,
By the Sunderbunds unwholesome, by the swamp
    Moist and damp;
And the City and the Viceroy, as we see,
    Don't agree.

Once, two hundred years ago, the trader came
    Meek and tame.

Where his timid foot first halted, there he stayed,
    Till mere trade
Grew to Empire, and he sent his armies forth
    South and North
Till the country from Peshawur to Ceylon
    Was his own.

Thus the midday halt of Charnock--more's the pity!
    Grew a City.

As the fungus sprouts chaotic from its bed,
    So it spread--
Chance-directed, chance-erected, laid and built
    On the silt--
Palace, byre, hovel--poverty and pride--
    Side by side;
And, above the packed and pestilential town,
    Death looked down.

But the Rulers in that City by the Sea
    Turned to flee--
Fled, with each returning spring-tide from its ills
    To the Hills.

From the clammy fogs of morning, from the blaze
    Of old days,
From the sickness of the noontide, from the heat,
    Beat retreat;
For the country from Peshawur to Ceylon
    Was their own.

But the Merchant risked the perils of the Plain
    For his gain.

Now the resting-place of Charnock, 'neath the palms,
    Asks an alms,
And the burden of its lamentation is, 
    Briefly, this:
"Because for certain months, we boil and stew,
    So should you.

Cast the Viceroy and his Council, to perspire
    In our fire!"
And for answer to the argument, in vain
    We explain
That an amateur Saint Lawrence cannot fry:
    "All must fry!"
That the Merchant risks the perils of the Plain
    For gain.

Nor can Rulers rule a house that men grow rich in,
    From its kitchen.

Let the Babu drop inflammatory hints
  In his prints;
And mature--consistent soul--his plan for stealing
  To Darjeeling:
Let the Merchant seek, who makes his silver pile,
    England's isle;
Let the City Charnock pitched on--evil day!
    Go Her way.

Though the argosies of Asia at Her doors
    Heap their stores,
Though Her enterprise and energy secure
    Income sure,
Though "out-station orders punctually obeyed"
    Swell Her trade--
Still, for rule, administration, and the rest,
    Simla's best.

The End
*    *    *    *    *    *    *    *



VOLUME II BALLADS AND BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS


BALLADS


THE BALLAD OF EAST AND WEST

     Oh, East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall
meet,
     Till Earth and Sky stand presently at God's great Judgment
Seat;
     But there is neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed, nor Birth,
     When two strong men stand face to face,
       tho' they come from the ends of the earth!

Kamal is out with twenty men to raise the Border-side,
And he has lifted the Colonel's mare that is the Colonel's pride:
He has lifted her out of the stable-door between the dawn and the day,
And turned the calkins upon her feet, and ridden her far away.

Then up and spoke the Colonel's son that led a troop of the Guides:
"Is there never a man of all my men can say where Kamal hides?"
Then up and spoke Mahommed Khan, the son of the Ressaldar:
"If ye know the track of the morning-mist, ye know where his pickets are.

"At dusk he harries the Abazai--at dawn he is into Bonair,
But he must go by Fort Bukloh to his own place to fare,
So if ye gallop to Fort Bukloh as fast as a bird can fly,
By the favour of God ye may cut him off ere he win to the Tongue of Jagai.

"But if he be past the Tongue of Jagai, right swiftly turn ye then,
For the length and the breadth of that grisly plain is sown with Kamal's men.
There is rock to the left, and rock to the right, and low lean thorn between,
And ye may hear a breech-bolt snick where never a man is seen."

The Colonel's son has taken a horse, and a raw rough dun was he,
With the mouth of a bell and the heart of Hell and the head of the gallows-
tree.

The Colonel's son to the Fort has won, they bid him stay to eat--
Who rides at the tail of a Border thief, he sits not long at his meat.

He's up and away from Fort Bukloh as fast as he can fly,
Till he was aware of his father's mare in the gut of the Tongue of Jagai,
Till he was aware of his father's mare with Kamal upon her back,
And when he could spy the white of her eye, he made the pistol crack.

He has fired once, he has fired twice, but the whistling ball went wide.
"Ye shoot like a soldier," Kamal said.  "Show now if ye can ride."

It's up and over the Tongue of Jagai, as blown dustdevils go,
The dun he fled like a stag of ten, but the mare like a barren doe.

The dun he leaned against the bit and slugged his head above,
But the red mare played with the snaffle-bars, as a maiden plays with a glove.

There was rock to the left and rock to the right, and low lean thorn between,
And thrice he heard a breech-bolt snick tho' never a man was seen.

They have ridden the low moon out of the sky, their hoofs drum up the dawn,
The dun he went like a wounded bull, but the mare like a new-roused fawn.

The dun he fell at a water-course--in a woful heap fell he,
And Kamal has turned the red mare back, and pulled the rider free.

He has knocked the pistol out of his hand--small room was there to strive,
"'Twas only by favour of mine," quoth he, "ye rode so long alive:
There was not a rock for twenty mile, there was not a clump of tree,
But covered a man of my own men with his rifle cocked on his knee.

"If I had raised my bridle-hand, as I have held it low,
The little jackals that flee so fast were feasting all in a row:
If I had bowed my head on my breast, as I have held it high,
The kite that whistles above us now were gorged till she could not fly."
Lightly answered the Colonel's son:  "Do good to bird and beast,
But count who come for the broken meats before thou makest a feast.

"If there should follow a thousand swords to carry my bones away,
Belike the price of a jackal's meal were more than a thief could pay.

"They will feed their horse on the standing crop, their men on the garnered
grain,
The thatch of the byres will serve their fires when all the cattle are slain.

"But if thou thinkest the price be fair,--thy brethren wait to sup,
The hound is kin to the jackal-spawn,--howl, dog, and call them up!
And if thou thinkest the price be high, in steer and gear and stack,
Give me my father's mare again, and I'll fight my own way back!"

Kamal has gripped him by the hand and set him upon his feet.
"No talk shall be of dogs," said he, "when wolf and gray wolf meet.

"May I eat dirt if thou hast hurt of me in deed or breath;
What dam of lances brought thee forth to jest at the dawn with Death?"
Lightly answered the Colonel's son:  "I hold by the blood of my clan:
Take up the mare for my father's gift--by God, she has carried a man!"
The red mare ran to the Colonel's son, and nuzzled against his breast;
"We be two strong men," said Kamal then, "but she loveth the younger best.

So she shall go with a lifter's dower, my turquoise-studded rein,
My broidered saddle and saddle-cloth, and silver stirrups twain."
The Colonel's son a pistol drew and held it muzzle-end,
"Ye have taken the one from a foe," said he;
  "will ye take the mate from a friend?"
"A gift for a gift," said Kamal straight; "a limb for the risk of a limb.

"Thy father has sent his son to me, I'll send my son to him!"
With that he whistled his only son, that dropped from a mountain-crest--
He trod the ling like a buck in spring, and he looked like a lance in rest.

"Now here is thy master," Kamal said, "who leads a troop of the Guides,
And thou must ride at his left side as shield on shoulder rides.
Till Death or I cut loose the tie, at camp and board and bed,
Thy life is his--thy fate it is to guard him with thy head.

"So, thou must eat the White Queen's meat, and all her foes are thine,
And thou must harry thy father's hold for the peace of the Border-line,
And thou must make a trooper tough and hack thy way to power--
Belike they will raise thee to Ressaldar when I am hanged in Peshawur."

They have looked each other between the eyes, and there they found no fault,
They have taken the Oath of the Brother-in-Blood on leavened bread and salt:
They have taken the Oath of the Brother-in-Blood on fire and fresh-cut sod,
On the hilt and the haft of the Khyber knife, and the Wondrous Names of God.

The Colonel's son he rides the mare and Kamal's boy the dun,
And two have come back to Fort Bukloh where there went forth but one.

And when they drew to the Quarter-Guard, full twenty swords flew clear--
There was not a man but carried his feud with the blood of the mountaineer.

"Ha' done! ha' done!" said the Colonel's son.
  "Put up the steel at your sides!
Last night ye had struck at a Border thief--
  tonight 'tis a man of the Guides!"

     Oh, East is East, and West is West, and never the twain shall meet,
     Till Earth and Sky stand presently at God's great Judgment Seat;
     But there is neither East nor West, Border, nor Breed, nor Birth,
     When two strong men stand face to face,
       tho' they come from the ends of the earth!


THE LAST SUTTEE

Not many years ago a King died in one of the Rajpoot States. His wives,
disregarding the orders of the English against Suttee, would have broken out
of the palace had not the gates been barred.

But one of them, disguised as the King's favourite dancing-girl, passed
through the line of guards and reached the pyre.  There, her courage failing,
she prayed her cousin, a baron of the court, to kill her.  This he did, not
knowing who she was.


Udai Chand lay sick to death
    In his hold by Gungra hill.
All night we heard the death-gongs ring
For the soul of the dying Rajpoot King,
All night beat up from the women's wing
    A cry that we could not still.

All night the barons came and went,
    The lords of the outer guard:
All night the cressets glimmered pale
On Ulwar sabre and Tonk jezail,
Mewar headstall and Marwar mail,
    That clinked in the palace yard.

In the Golden room on the palace roof
    All night he fought for air:
And there was sobbing behind the screen,
Rustle and whisper of women unseen,
And the hungry eyes of the Boondi Queen
    On the death she might not share.

He passed at dawn--the death-fire leaped
    From ridge to river-head,
From the Malwa plains to the Abu scars:
And wail upon wail went up to the stars
Behind the grim zenana-bars,
    When they knew that the King was dead.

The dumb priest knelt to tie his mouth
    And robe him for the pyre.
The Boondi Queen beneath us cried:
"See, now, that we die as our mothers died
In the bridal-bed by our master's side!
    Out, women!--to the fire!"

We drove the great gates home apace:
    White hands were on the sill:
But ere the rush of the unseen feet
Had reached the turn to the open street,
The bars shot down, the guard-drum beat--
    We held the dovecot still.

A face looked down in the gathering day,
    And laughing spoke from the wall:
"Ohe', they mourn here:  let me by--
Azizun, the  Lucknow nautch-girl, I!
When the house is rotten, the rats must fly,
    And I seek another thrall.

"For I ruled the King as ne'er did Queen,--
    Tonight the Queens rule me!
Guard them safely, but let me go,
Or ever they pay the debt they owe
In scourge and torture!"  She leaped below,
    And the grim guard watched her flee.

They knew that the King had spent his soul
    On a North-bred dancing-girl:
That he prayed to a flat-nosed Lucknow god,
And kissed the ground where her feet had trod,
And doomed to death at her drunken nod,
    And swore by her lightest curl.

We bore the King to his fathers' place,
    Where the tombs of the Sun-born stand:
Where the gray apes swing, and the peacocks preen
On fretted pillar and jewelled screen,
And the wild boar couch in the house of the Queen
    On the drift of the desert sand.

The herald read his titles forth,
    We set the logs aglow:
"Friend of the English, free from fear,
Baron of Luni to Jeysulmeer,
Lord of the Desert of Bikaneer,
    King of the Jungle,--go!"

All night the red flame stabbed the sky
    With wavering wind-tossed spears:
And out of a shattered temple crept
A woman who veiled her head and wept,
And called on the King--but the great King slept,
    And turned not for her tears.

Small thought had he to mark the strife--
    Cold fear with hot desire--
When thrice she leaped from the leaping flame,
And thrice she beat her breast for shame,
And thrice like a wounded dove she came
    And moaned about the fire.

One watched, a bow-shot from the blaze,
    The silent streets between,
Who had stood by the King in sport and fray,
To blade in ambush or boar at bay,
And he was a baron old and gray,
    And kin to the Boondi Queen.

He said: "O shameless, put aside
    The veil upon thy brow!
Who held the King and all his land
To the wanton will of a harlot's hand!
Will the white ash rise from the blistered brand?
    Stoop down, and call him now!"

Then she:  "By the faith of my tarnished soul,
    All things I did not well,
I had hoped to clear ere the fire died,
And lay me down by my master's side
To rule in Heaven his only bride,
    While the others howl in Hell.

"But I have felt the fire's breath,
    And hard it is to die!
Yet if I may pray a Rajpoot lord
To sully the steel of a Thakur's sword
With base-born blood of a trade abhorred,"--
    And the Thakur answered, "Ay."

He drew and struck:  the straight blade drank
    The life beneath the breast.

"I had looked for the Queen to face the flame,
But the harlot dies for the Rajpoot dame--
Sister of mine, pass, free from shame,
    Pass with thy King to rest!"

The black log crashed above the white:
    The little flames and lean,
Red as slaughter and blue as steel,
That whistled and fluttered from head to heel,
Leaped up anew, for they found their meal
    On the heart of--the Boondi Queen!


THE BALLAD OF THE KING'S MERCY

  Abdhur Rahman, the Durani Chief,
    of him is the story told.
  His mercy fills the Khyber hills--
    his grace is manifold;
  He has taken toll of the North and the South--
    his glory reacheth far,
  And they tell the tale of his charity
    from Balkh to Kandahar.


Before the old Peshawur Gate, where Kurd and Kaffir meet,
The Governor of Kabul dealt the Justice of the Street,
And that was strait as running noose and swift as plunging knife,
Tho' he who held the longer purse might hold the longer life.


There was a hound of Hindustan had struck a Euzufzai,
Wherefore they spat upon his face and led him out to die.

It chanced the King went forth that hour when throat was bared to knife;
The Kaffir grovelled under-hoof and clamoured for his life.


Then said the King:  "Have hope, O friend!  Yea, Death disgraced is hard;
Much honour shall be thine"; and called the Captain of the Guard,
Yar Khan, a bastard of the Blood, so city-babble saith,
And he was honoured of the King--the which is salt to Death;
And he was son of Daoud Shah, the Reiver of the Plains,
And blood of old Durani Lords ran fire in his veins;
And 'twas to tame an Afghan pride nor Hell nor Heaven could bind,
The King would make him butcher to a yelping cur of Hind.


"Strike!" said the King. "King's blood art thou--his death shall be his
pride!"
Then louder, that the crowd might catch:  "Fear not--his arms are tied!"
Yar Khan drew clear the Khyber knife, and struck, and sheathed again.
"O man, thy will is done," quoth he; "a King this dog hath slain."

  Abdhur Rahman, the Durani Chief,
    to the North and the South is sold.
  The North and the South shall open their mouth
    to a Ghilzai flag unrolled,
  When the big guns speak to the Khyber peak,
    and his dog-Heratis fly:
  Ye have heard the song--How long? How long?
    Wolves of the Abazai!

That night before the watch was set, when all the streets were clear,
The Governor of Kabul spoke:  "My King, hast thou no fear?
Thou knowest--thou hast heard,"--his speech died at his master's face.

And grimly said the Afghan King:  "I rule the Afghan race.
My path is mine--see thou to thine--tonight upon thy bed
Think who there be in Kabul now that clamour for thy head."

That night when all the gates were shut to City and to throne,
Within a little garden-house the King lay down alone.

Before the sinking of the moon, which is the Night of Night,
Yar Khan came softly to the King to make his honour white.
The children of the town had mocked beneath his horse's hoofs,
The harlots of the town had hailed him "butcher!" from their roofs.

But as he groped against the wall, two hands upon him fell,
The King behind his shoulder spake:  "Dead man, thou dost not well!
'Tis ill to jest with Kings by day and seek a boon by night;
And that thou bearest in thy hand is all too sharp to write.

"But three days hence, if God be good, and if thy strength remain,
Thou shalt demand one boon of me and bless me in thy pain.
For I am merciful to all, and most of all to thee.

"My butcher of the shambles, rest--no knife hast thou for me!"

  Abdhur Rahman, the Durani Chief,
    holds hard by the South and the North;
  But the Ghilzai knows, ere the melting snows,
    when the swollen banks break forth,
  When the red-coats crawl to the sungar wall,
    and his Usbeg lances fail:
  Ye have heard the song--How long? How long?
    Wolves of the Zuka Kheyl!

They stoned him in the rubbish-field when dawn was in the sky,
According to the written word, "See that he do not die."

They stoned him till the stones were piled above him on the plain,
And those the labouring limbs displaced they tumbled back again.


One watched beside the dreary mound that veiled the battered
thing,
And him the King with laughter called the Herald of the King.


It was upon the second night, the night of Ramazan,
The watcher leaning earthward heard the message of Yar Khan.

From shattered breast through shrivelled lips broke forth the rattling breath,
"Creature of God, deliver me from agony of Death."

They sought the King among his girls, and risked their lives thereby:
"Protector of the Pitiful, give orders that he die!"

"Bid him endure until the day," a lagging answer came;
"The night is short, and he can pray and learn to bless my name."

Before the dawn three times he spoke, and on the day once more:
"Creature of God, deliver me, and bless the King therefor!"

They shot him at the morning prayer, to ease him of his pain,
And when he heard the matchlocks clink, he blessed the King again.

Which thing the singers made a song for all the world to sing,
So that the Outer Seas may know the mercy of the King.

  Abdhur Rahman, the Durani Chief,
    of him is the story told,
  He has opened his mouth to the North and the South,
    they have stuffed his mouth with gold.

  Ye know the truth of his tender ruth--
    and sweet his favours are:
  Ye have heard the song--How long? How long?
    from Balkh to Kandahar.


THE BALLAD OF THE KING'S JEST

When spring-time flushes the desert grass,
Our kafilas wind through the Khyber Pass.

Lean are the camels but fat the frails,
Light are the purses but heavy the bales,
As the snowbound trade of the North comes down
To the market-square of Peshawur town.

In a turquoise twilight, crisp and chill,
A kafila camped at the foot of the hill.

Then blue smoke-haze of the cooking rose,
And tent-peg answered to hammer-nose;
And the picketed ponies, shag and wild,
Strained at their ropes as the feed was piled;
And the bubbling camels beside the load
Sprawled for a furlong adown the road;
And the Persian pussy-cats, brought for sale,
Spat at the dogs from the camel-bale;
And the tribesmen bellowed to hasten the food;
And the camp-fires twinkled by Fort Jumrood;
And there fled on the wings of the gathering dusk
A savour of camels and carpets and musk,
A murmur of voices, a reek of smoke,
To tell us the trade of the Khyber woke.

The lid of the flesh-pot chattered high,
The knives were whetted and--then came I
To Mahbub Ali the muleteer,
Patching his bridles and counting his gear,
Crammed with the gossip of half a year.

But Mahbub Ali the kindly said,
"Better is speech when the belly is fed."
So we plunged the hand to the mid-wrist deep
In a cinnamon stew of the fat-tailed sheep,
And he who never hath tasted the food,
By Allah! he knoweth not bad from good.

We cleansed our beards of the mutton-grease,
We lay on the mats and were filled with peace,
And the talk slid north, and the talk slid south,
With the sliding puffs from the hookah-mouth.

Four things greater than all things are,--
Women and Horses and Power and War.

We spake of them all, but the last the most,
For I sought a word of a Russian post,
Of a shifty promise, an unsheathed sword
And a gray-coat guard on the Helmund ford.

Then Mahbub Ali lowered his eyes
In the fashion of one who is weaving lies.

Quoth he: "Of the Russians who can say?
When the night is gathering all is gray.
But we look that the gloom of the night shall die
In the morning flush of a blood-red sky.

"Friend of my heart, is it meet or wise
To warn a King of his enemies?
We know what Heaven or Hell may bring,
But no man knoweth the mind of the King.

"That unsought counsel is cursed of God
Attesteth the story of Wali Dad.

"His sire was leaky of tongue and pen,
His dam was a clucking Khuttuck hen;
And the colt bred close to the vice of each,
For he carried the curse of an unstanched speech.

"Therewith madness--so that he sought
The favour of kings at the Kabul court;
And travelled, in hope of honour, far
To the line where the gray-coat squadrons are.

"There have I journeyed too--but I
Saw naught, said naught, and--did not die!
He harked to rumour, and snatched at a breath
Of 'this one knoweth' and 'that one saith',--
Legends that ran from mouth to mouth
Of a gray-coat coming, and sack of the South.

"These have I also heard--they pass
With each new spring and the winter grass.

"Hot-foot southward, forgotten of God,
Back to the city ran Wali Dad,
Even to Kabul--in full durbar
The King held talk with his Chief in War.

"Into the press of the crowd he broke,
And what he had heard of the coming spoke.


"Then Gholam Hyder, the Red Chief, smiled,
As a mother might on a babbling child;
But those who would laugh restrained their breath,
When the face of the King showed dark as death.

"Evil it is in full durbar
To cry to a ruler of gathering war!
Slowly he led to a peach-tree small,
That grew by a cleft of the city wall.

"And he said to the boy: 'They shall praise thy zeal
So long as the red spurt follows the steel.

"And the Russ is upon us even now?
Great is thy prudence--await them, thou.
Watch from the tree.  Thou art young and strong,
Surely thy vigil is not for long.

"The Russ is upon us, thy clamour ran?
Surely an hour shall bring their van.
Wait and watch.  When the host is near,
Shout aloud that my men may hear.'

"Friend of my heart, is it meet or wise
To warn a King of his enemies?
A guard was set that he might not flee--
A score of bayonets ringed the tree.

"The peach-bloom fell in showers of snow,
When he shook at his death as he looked below.
By the power of God, who alone is great,
Till the seventh day he fought with his fate.

"Then madness took him, and men declare
He mowed in the branches as ape and bear,
And last as a sloth, ere his body failed,
And he hung as a bat in the forks, and wailed,
And sleep the cord of his hands untied,
And he fell, and was caught on the points and died.

"Heart of my heart, is it meet or wise
To warn a King of his enemies?
We know what Heaven or Hell may bring,
But no man knoweth the mind of the King.

"Of the gray-coat coming who can say?
When the night is gathering all is gray.

"To things greater than all things are,
The first is Love, and the second War.

"And since we know not how War may prove,
Heart of my heart, let us talk of Love!"


THE BALLAD OF BOH DA THONE

          This is the ballad of Boh Da Thone,
          Erst a Pretender to Theebaw's throne,
          Who harried the district of Alalone:
          How he met with his fate and the V.P.P.

          At the hand of Harendra Mukerji,
          Senior Gomashta, G.B.T.

Boh Da Thone was a warrior bold:
His sword and his Snider were bossed with gold,

And the Peacock Banner his henchmen bore
Was stiff with bullion, but stiffer with gore.

He shot at the strong and he slashed at the weak
From the Salween scrub to the Chindwin teak:

He crucified noble, he sacrificed mean,
He filled old ladies with kerosene:

While over the water the papers cried,
"The patriot fights for his countryside!"

But little they cared for the Native Press,
The worn white soldiers in Khaki dress,

Who tramped through the jungle and camped in the byre,
Who died in the swamp and were tombed in the mire,

Who gave up their lives, at the Queen's Command,
For the Pride of their Race and the Peace of the Land.

Now, first of the foemen of Boh Da Thone
Was Captain O'Neil of the "Black Tyrone",
And his was a Company, seventy strong,
Who hustled that dissolute Chief along.

There were lads from Galway and Louth and Meath
Who went to their death with a joke in their teeth,
And worshipped with fluency, fervour, and zeal
The mud on the boot-heels of "Crook" O'Neil.

But ever a blight on their labours lay,
And ever their quarry would vanish away,
Till the sun-dried boys of the Black Tyrone
Took a brotherly interest in Boh Da Thone:
And, sooth, if pursuit in possession ends,
The Boh and his trackers were best of friends.

The word of a scout--a march by night--
A rush through the mist--a scattering fight--
A volley from cover--a corpse in the clearing--
The glimpse of a loin-cloth and heavy jade earring--
The flare of a village--the tally of slain--
And. . .the Boh was abroad "on the raid" again!

They cursed their luck, as the Irish will,
They gave him credit for cunning and skill,
They buried their dead, they bolted their beef,
And started anew on the track of the thief
Till, in place of the "Kalends of Greece", men said,
"When Crook and his darlings come back with the head."

They had hunted the Boh from the hills to the plain--
He doubled and broke for the hills again:
They had crippled his power for rapine and raid,
They had routed him out of his pet stockade,
And at last, they came, when the Day Star tired,
To a camp deserted--a village fired.

A black cross blistered the Morning-gold,
And the body upon it was stark and cold.
The wind of the dawn went merrily past,
The high grass bowed her plumes to the blast.

And out of the grass, on a sudden, broke
A spirtle of fire, a whorl of smoke--

And Captain O'Neil of the Black Tyrone
Was blessed with a slug in the ulnar-bone--
The gift of his enemy Boh Da Thone.

(Now a slug that is hammered from telegraph-wire
Is a thorn in the flesh and a rankling fire.)
*   *   *   *   *

The shot-wound festered--as shot-wounds may
In a steaming barrack at Mandalay.

The left arm throbbed, and the Captain swore,
"I'd like to be after the Boh once more!"
The fever held him--the Captain said,
"I'd give a hundred to look at his head!"

The Hospital punkahs creaked and whirred,
But Babu Harendra (Gomashta) heard.

He thought of the cane-brake, green and dank,
That girdled his home by the Dacca tank.
He thought of his wife and his High School son,
He thought--but abandoned the thought--of a gun.
His sleep was broken by visions dread
Of a shining Boh with a silver head.

He kept his counsel and went his way,
And swindled the cartmen of half their pay.
*   *   *   *   *

And the months went on, as the worst must do,
And the Boh returned to the raid anew.

But the Captain had quitted the long-drawn strife,
And in far Simoorie had taken a wife.
And she was a damsel of delicate mould,
With hair like the sunshine and heart of gold,

And little she knew the arms that embraced
Had cloven a man from the brow to the waist:
And little she knew that the loving lips
Had ordered a quivering life's eclipse,

And the eye that lit at her lightest breath
Had glared unawed in the Gates of Death.

(For these be matters a man would hide,
As a general rule, from an innocent Bride.)

And little the Captain thought of the past,
And, of all men, Babu Harendra last.
*   *   *   *   *

But slow, in the sludge of the Kathun road,
The Government Bullock Train toted its load.
Speckless and spotless and shining with ghee,
In the rearmost cart sat the Babu-jee.

And ever a phantom before him fled
Of a scowling Boh with a silver head.

Then the lead-cart stuck, though the coolies slaved,
And the cartmen flogged and the escort raved;
And out of the jungle, with yells and squeals,
Pranced Boh Da Thone, and his gang at his heels!

Then belching blunderbuss answered back
The Snider's snarl and the carbine's crack,
And the blithe revolver began to sing
To the blade that twanged on the locking-ring,
And the brown flesh blued where the bay'net kissed,
As the steel shot back with a wrench and a twist,
And the great white bullocks with onyx eyes
Watched the souls of the dead arise,
And over the smoke of the fusillade
The Peacock Banner staggered and swayed.

Oh, gayest of scrimmages man may see
Is a well-worked rush on the G.B.T.!

The Babu shook at the horrible sight,
And girded his ponderous loins for flight,
But Fate had ordained that the Boh should start
On a lone-hand raid of the rearmost cart,
And out of that cart, with a bellow of woe,
The Babu fell--flat on the top of the Boh!

For years had Harendra served the State,
To the growth of his purse and the girth of his _pet_.

There were twenty stone, as the tally-man knows,
On the broad of the chest of this best of Bohs.
And twenty stone from a height discharged
Are bad for a Boh with a spleen enlarged.

Oh, short was the struggle--severe was the shock--
He dropped like a bullock--he lay like a block;
And the Babu above him, convulsed with fear,
Heard the labouring life-breath hissed out in his ear.

And thus in a fashion undignified
The princely pest of the Chindwin died.
*   *   *   *   *

Turn now to Simoorie where, lapped in his ease,
The Captain is petting the Bride on his knees,
Where the whit of the bullet, the wounded man's scream
Are mixed as the mist of some devilish dream--
Forgotten, forgotten the sweat of the shambles
Where the hill-daisy blooms and the gray monkey gambols,
From the sword-belt set free and released from the steel,
The Peace of the Lord is with Captain O'Neil.
*   *   *   *   *

Up the hill to Simoorie--most patient of drudges--
The bags on his shoulder, the mail-runner trudges.

"For Captain O'Neil, Sahib.  One hundred and ten
Rupees to collect on delivery."
                                 Then

(Their breakfast was stopped while the screw-jack and hammer
Tore waxcloth, split teak-wood, and chipped out the dammer;)

Open-eyed, open-mouthed, on the napery's snow,
With a crash and a thud, rolled--the Head of the Boh!

And gummed to the scalp was a letter which ran:--
               "IN FIELDING FORCE SERVICE.

                    Encampment,
--th Jan.

"Dear Sir,--I have honour to send, as you said,
For final approval (see under) Boh's Head;

"Was took by myself in most bloody affair.

By High Education brought pressure to bear.

"Now violate Liberty, time being bad,
To mail V.P.P. (rupees hundred)  Please add

"Whatever Your Honour can pass.  Price of Blood
Much cheap at one hundred, and children want food;

"So trusting Your Honour will somewhat retain
True love and affection for Govt. Bullock Train,

"And show awful kindness to satisfy me,
        I am,
            Graceful Master,
                          Your
                            H. MUKERJI."
*   *   *   *   *

As the rabbit is drawn to the rattlesnake's power,
As the smoker's eye fills at the opium hour,
As a horse reaches up to the manger above,
As the waiting ear yearns for the whisper of love,
From the arms of the Bride, iron-visaged and slow,
The Captain bent down to the Head of the Boh.

And e'en as he looked on the Thing where It lay
'Twixt the winking new spoons and the napkins' array,
The freed mind fled back to the long-ago days--
The hand-to-hand scuffle--the smoke and the blaze--
The forced march at night and the quick rush at dawn--
The banjo at twilight, the burial ere morn--
The stench of the marshes--the raw, piercing smell
When the overhand stabbing-cut silenced the yell--
The oaths of his Irish that surged when they stood
Where the black crosses hung o'er the Kuttamow flood.

As a derelict ship drifts away with the tide
The Captain went out on the Past from his Bride,

Back, back, through the springs to the chill of the year,
When he hunted the Boh from Maloon to Tsaleer.

As the shape of a corpse dimmers up through deep water,
In his eye lit the passionless passion of slaughter,
And men who had fought with O'Neil for the life
Had gazed on his face with less dread than his wife.

For she who had held him so long could not hold him--
Though a four-month Eternity should have controlled him--
But watched the twin Terror--the head turned to head--
The scowling, scarred Black, and the flushed savage Red--
The spirit that changed from her knowing and flew to
Some grim hidden Past she had never a clue to.

But It knew as It grinned, for he touched it unfearing,
And muttered aloud, "So you kept that jade earring!"

Then nodded, and kindly, as friend nods to friend,
"Old man, you fought well, but you lost in the end."
*   *   *   *   *

The visions departed, and Shame followed Passion:--
"He took what I said in this horrible fashion,

"I'll write to Harendra!"  With language unsainted
The Captain came back to the Bride. . .who had fainted.
*   *   *   *   *

And this is a fiction?  No.  Go to Simoorie
And look at their baby, a twelve-month old Houri,
A pert little, Irish-eyed Kathleen Mavournin--
She's always about on the Mall of a mornin'--

And you'll see, if her right shoulder-strap is displaced,
This:  Gules upon argent, a Boh's Head, erased!


THE LAMENT OF THE BORDER CATTLE THIEF

O woe is me for the merry life
 I led beyond the Bar,
And a treble woe for my winsome wife
 That weeps at Shalimar.

They have taken away my long jezail,
 My shield and sabre fine,
And heaved me into the Central jail
 For lifting of the kine.

The steer may low within the byre,
 The Jat may tend his grain,
But there'll be neither loot nor fire
 Till I come back again.

And God have mercy on the Jat
 When once my fetters fall,
And Heaven defend the farmer's hut
 When I am loosed from thrall.

It's woe to bend the stubborn back
 Above the grinching quern,
It's woe to hear the leg-bar clack
 And jingle when I turn!

But for the sorrow and the shame,
 The brand on me and mine,
I'll pay you back in leaping flame
 And loss of the butchered kine.

For every cow I spared before
 In charity set free,
If I may reach my hold once more
 I'll reive an honest three.

For every time I raised the low
 That scared the dusty plain,
By sword and cord, by torch and tow
 I'll light the land with twain!

Ride hard, ride hard to Abazai,
 Young Sahib with the yellow hair--
Lie close, lie close as khuttucks lie,
 Fat herds below Bonair!

The one I'll shoot at twilight-tide,
 At dawn I'll drive the other;
The black shall mourn for hoof and hide,
 The white man for his brother.

'Tis war, red war, I'll give you then,
 War till my sinews fail;
For the wrong you have done to a chief of men,
 And a thief of the Zukka Kheyl.

And if I fall to your hand afresh
 I give you leave for the sin,
That you cram my throat with the foul pig's flesh,
 And swing me in the skin!


THE RHYME OF THE THREE CAPTAINS

This ballad appears to refer to one of the exploits of the notorious Paul
Jones, the American pirate.  It is founded on fact.


   . . . At the close of a winter day,
Their anchors down, by London town, the Three Great Captains lay;
And one was Admiral of the North from Solway Firth to Skye,
And one was Lord of the Wessex coast and all the lands thereby,
And one was Master of the Thames from Limehouse to Blackwall,
And he was Captain of the Fleet--the bravest of them all.

Their good guns guarded their great gray sides that were thirty foot in the
sheer,
When there came a certain trading-brig with news of a privateer.

Her rigging was rough with the clotted drift that drives in a Northern breeze,
Her sides were clogged with the lazy weed that spawns in the Eastern seas.

Light she rode in the rude tide-rip, to left and right she rolled,
And the skipper sat on the scuttle-butt and stared at an empty hold.

"I ha' paid Port dues for your Law," quoth he, "and where is the Law ye boast
If I sail unscathed from a heathen port to be robbed on a Christian coast?
Ye have smoked the hives of the Laccadives as we burn the lice in a bunk,
We tack not now to a Gallang prow or a plunging Pei-ho junk;
I had no fear but the seas were clear as far as a sail might fare
Till I met with a lime-washed Yankee brig that rode off Finisterre.

"There were canvas blinds to his bow-gun ports to screen the weight he bore,
And the signals ran for a merchantman from Sandy Hook to the Nore.

"He would not fly the Rovers' flag--the bloody or the black,
But now he floated the Gridiron and now he flaunted the Jack.
He spoke of the Law as he crimped my crew--he swore it was only a loan;
But when I would ask for my own again, he swore it was none of my own.

"He has taken my little parrakeets that nest beneath the Line,
He has stripped my rails of the shaddock-frails and the green unripened pine;
He has taken my bale of dammer and spice I won beyond the seas,
He has taken my grinning heathen gods--and what should he want o' these?
My foremast would not mend his boom, my deckhouse patch his boats;
He has whittled the two, this Yank Yahoo, to peddle for shoe-peg oats.

"I could not fight for the failing light and a rough beam-sea beside,
But I hulled him once for a clumsy crimp and twice because he lied.

"Had I had guns (as I had goods) to work my Christian harm,
I had run him up from his quarter-deck to trade with his own yard-arm;
I had nailed his ears to my capstan-head, and ripped them off with a saw,
And soused them in the bilgewater, and served them to him raw;
I had flung him blind in a rudderless boat to rot in the rocking dark,
I had towed him aft of his own craft, a bait for his brother shark;
I had lapped him round with cocoa husk, and drenched him with the oil,
And lashed him fast to his own mast to blaze above my spoil;
I had stripped his hide for my hammock-side, and tasselled his beard i' the
mesh,
And spitted his crew on the live bamboo that grows through the gangrened
flesh;
I had hove him down by the mangroves brown, where the mud-reef sucks and
draws,
Moored by the heel to his own keel to wait for the land-crab's claws!
He is lazar within and lime without, ye can nose him far enow,
For he carries the taint of a musky ship--the reek of the slaver's dhow!"
The skipper looked at the tiering guns and the bulwarks tall and cold,
And the Captains Three full courteously peered down at the gutted hold,
And the Captains Three called courteously from deck to scuttle-butt:--
"Good Sir, we ha' dealt with that merchantman or ever your teeth were cut.

"Your words be words of a lawless race, and the Law it standeth thus:
He comes of a race that have never a Law, and he never has boarded us.

"We ha' sold him canvas and rope and spar--we know that his price is fair,
And we know that he weeps for the lack of a Law as he rides off Finisterre.

"And since he is damned for a gallows-thief by you and better than you,
We hold it meet that the English fleet should know that we hold him true."
The skipper called to the tall taffrail:--"And what is that to me?
Did ever you hear of a Yankee brig that rifled a Seventy-three?
Do I loom so large from your quarter-deck that I lift like a ship o' the Line?
He has learned to run from a shotted gun and harry such craft as mine.

"There is never a Law on the Cocos Keys to hold a white man in,
But we do not steal the niggers' meal, for that is a nigger's sin.

"Must he have his Law as a quid to chaw, or laid in brass on his wheel?
Does he steal with tears when he buccaneers? 'Fore Gad, then, why does he
steal?"
The skipper bit on a deep-sea word, and the word it was not sweet,
For he could see the Captains Three had signalled to the Fleet.

But three and two, in white and blue, the whimpering flags began:--
"We have heard a tale of a--foreign sail, but he is a merchantman."
The skipper peered beneath his palm and swore by the Great Horn Spoon:--
"'Fore Gad, the Chaplain of the Fleet would bless my picaroon!"
By two and three the flags blew free to lash the laughing air:--
"We have sold our spars to the merchantman--we know that his price is fair."
The skipper winked his Western eye, and swore by a China storm:--
"They ha' rigged him a Joseph's jury-coat to keep his honour warm."
The halliards twanged against the tops, the bunting bellied broad,
The skipper spat in the empty hold and mourned for a wasted cord.

Masthead--masthead, the signal sped by the line o' the British craft;
The skipper called to his Lascar crew, and put her about and laughed:--
"It's mainsail haul, my bully boys all--we'll out to the seas again--
Ere they set us to paint their pirate saint, or scrub at his grapnel-chain.

"It's fore-sheet free, with her head to the sea, and the swing of the unbought
brine--
We'll make no sport in an English court till we come as a ship o' the Line:
Till we come as a ship o' the Line, my lads, of thirty foot in the sheer,
Lifting again from the outer main with news of a privateer;
Flying his pluck at our mizzen-truck for weft of Admiralty,
Heaving his head for our dipsey-lead in sign that we keep the sea.

"Then fore-sheet home as she lifts to the foam--we stand on the outward tack,
We are paid in the coin of the white man's trade--the bezant is hard, ay, and
black.

"The frigate-bird shall carry my word to the Kling and the Orang-Laut
How a man may sail from a heathen coast to be robbed in a Christian port;
How a man may be robbed in Christian port while Three Great Captains there
Shall dip their flag to a slaver's rag--to show that his trade is fair!"


THE BALLAD OF THE CLAMPHERDOWN

It was our war-ship Clampherdown
 Would sweep the Channel clean,
Wherefore she kept her hatches close
When the merry Channel chops arose,
 To save the bleached marine.

She had one bow-gun of a hundred ton,
 And a great stern-gun beside;
They dipped their noses deep in the sea,
They racked their stays and stanchions free
 In the wash of the wind-whipped tide.

It was our war-ship Clampherdown,
 Fell in with a cruiser light
That carried the dainty Hotchkiss gun
And a pair o' heels wherewith to run
 From the grip of a close-fought fight.

She opened fire at seven miles--
 As ye shoot at a bobbing cork--
And once she fired and twice she fired,
Till the bow-gun drooped like a lily tired
 That lolls upon the stalk.

"Captain, the bow-gun melts apace,
 The deck-beams break below,
'Twere well to rest for an hour or twain,
And patch the shattered plates again."
 And he answered, "Make it so."

She opened fire within the mile--
 As ye shoot at the flying duck--
And the great stern-gun shot fair and true,
With the heave of the ship, to the stainless blue,
 And the great stern-turret stuck.

"Captain, the turret fills with steam,
 The feed-pipes burst below--
You can hear the hiss of the helpless ram,
You can hear the twisted runners jam."
 And he answered, "Turn and go!"

It was our war-ship Clampherdown,
 And grimly did she roll;
Swung round to take the cruiser's fire
As the White Whale faces the Thresher's ire
 When they war by the frozen Pole.

"Captain, the shells are falling fast,
 And faster still fall we;
And it is not meet for English stock
To bide in the heart of an eight-day clock
 The death they cannot see."

"Lie down, lie down, my bold A.B.,
 We drift upon her beam;
We dare not ram, for she can run;
And dare ye fire another gun,
 And die in the peeling steam?"

It was our war-ship Clampherdown
 That carried an armour-belt;
But fifty feet at stern and bow
Lay bare as the paunch of the purser's sow,
 To the hail of the Nordenfeldt.

"Captain, they hack us through and through;
 The chilled steel bolts are swift!
We have emptied the bunkers in open sea,
Their shrapnel bursts where our coal should be."
 And he answered, "Let her drift."

It was our war-ship Clampherdown,
 Swung round upon the tide,
Her two dumb guns glared south and north,
And the blood and the bubbling steam ran forth,
 And she ground the cruiser's side.

"Captain, they cry, the fight is done,
 They bid you send your sword."
And he answered, "Grapple her stern and bow.
They have asked for the steel.  They shall have it now;
 Out cutlasses and board!"

It was our war-ship Clampherdown
 Spewed up four hundred men;
And the scalded stokers yelped delight,
As they rolled in the waist and heard the fight
 Stamp o'er their steel-walled pen.

They cleared the cruiser end to end,
 From conning-tower to hold.
They fought as they fought in Nelson's fleet;
They were stripped to the waist, they were bare to the feet,
 As it was in the days of old.

It was the sinking Clampherdown
 Heaved up her battered side--
And carried a million pounds in steel,
To the cod and the corpse-fed conger-eel,
 And the scour of the Channel tide.

It was the crew of the Clampherdown
 Stood out to sweep the sea,
On a cruiser won from an ancient foe,
As it was in the days of long ago,
 And as it still shall be.


THE BALLAD OF THE "BOLIVAR"

     Seven men from all the world, back to Docks again,
     Rolling down the Ratcliffe Road drunk and raising Cain:
     Give the girls another drink 'fore we sign away--
     We that took the Bolivar out across the Bay!

We put out from Sunderland loaded down with rails;
 We put back to Sunderland 'cause our cargo shifted;
We put out from Sunderland--met the winter gales--
 Seven days and seven nights to the Start we drifted.

    Racketing her rivets loose, smoke-stack white as snow,
    All the coals adrift adeck, half the rails below,
    Leaking like a lobster-pot, steering like a dray--
    Out we took the Bolivar, out across the Bay!

One by one the Lights came up, winked and let us by;
 Mile by mile we waddled on, coal and fo'c'sle short;
Met a blow that laid us down, heard a bulkhead fly;
 Left the Wolf behind us with a two-foot list to port.

    Trailing like a wounded duck, working out her soul;
    Clanging like a smithy-shop after every roll;
    Just a funnel and a mast lurching through the spray--
    So we threshed the Bolivar out across the Bay!

'Felt her hog and felt her sag, betted when she'd break;
 Wondered every time she raced if she'd stand the shock;
Heard the seas like drunken men pounding at her strake;
 Hoped the Lord 'ud keep his thumb on the plummer-block.

    Banged against the iron decks, bilges choked with coal;
    Flayed and frozen foot and hand, sick of heart and soul;
    Last we prayed she'd buck herself into judgment Day--
    Hi! we cursed the Bolivar--knocking round the Bay!

O her nose flung up to sky, groaning to be still--
 Up and down and back we went, never time for breath;
Then the money paid at Lloyd's caught her by the heel,
 And the stars ran round and round dancin' at our death.

    Aching for an hour's sleep, dozing off between;
    'Heard the rotten rivets draw when she took it green;
    'Watched the compass chase its tail like a cat at play--
    That was on the Bolivar, south across the Bay.


Once we saw between the squalls, lyin' head to swell--
 Mad with work and weariness, wishin' they was we--
Some damned Liner's lights go by like a long hotel;
 Cheered her from the Bolivar--swampin' in the sea.

    Then a grayback cleared us out, then the skipper laughed;
    "Boys, the wheel has gone to Hell--rig the winches aft!
    Yoke the kicking rudder-head--get her under way!"
    So we steered her, pulley-haul, out across the Bay!

Just a pack o' rotten plates puttied up with tar,
In we came, an' time enough, 'cross Bilbao Bar.

    Overloaded, undermanned, meant to founder, we
    Euchred God Almighty's storm, bluffed the Eternal Sea!

     Seven men from all the world, back to town again,
     Rollin' down the Ratcliffe Road drunk and raising Cain:
     Seven men from out of Hell.  Ain't the owners gay,
     'Cause we took the "Bolivar" safe across the Bay?


THE ENGLISH FLAG

     Above the portico a flag-staff, bearing the Union Jack,
     remained fluttering in the flames for some time, but ultimately
     when it fell the crowds rent the air with shouts,
     and seemed to see significance in the incident.--DAILY PAPERS.


Winds of the World, give answer!  They are whimpering to and fro--
And what should they know of England who only England know?--
The poor little street-bred people that vapour and fume and brag,
They are lifting their heads in the stillness to yelp at the English Flag!

Must we borrow a clout from the Boer--to plaster anew with dirt?
An Irish liar's bandage, or an English coward's shirt?

We may not speak of England; her Flag's to sell or share.
What is the Flag of England?  Winds of the World, declare!

The North Wind blew:--"From Bergen my steel-shod vanguards go;
I chase your lazy whalers home from the Disko floe;
By the great North Lights above me I work the will of God,
And the liner splits on the ice-field or the Dogger fills with cod.

"I barred my gates with iron, I shuttered my doors with flame,
Because to force my ramparts your nutshell navies came;
I took the sun from their presence, I cut them down with my blast,
And they died, but the Flag of England blew free ere the spirit passed.

"The lean white bear hath seen it in the long, long Arctic night,
The musk-ox knows the standard that flouts the Northern Light:
What is the Flag of England?  Ye have but my bergs to dare,
Ye have but my drifts to conquer.  Go forth, for it is there!"

The South Wind sighed:--"From the Virgins my mid-sea course was ta'en
Over a thousand islands lost in an idle main,
Where the sea-egg flames on the coral and the long-backed breakers croon
Their endless ocean legends to the lazy, locked lagoon.
                                             
"Strayed amid lonely islets, mazed amid outer keys,
I waked the palms to laughter--I tossed the scud in the breeze--
Never was isle so little, never was sea so lone,
But over the scud and the palm-trees an English flag was flown.

"I have wrenched it free from the halliard to hang for a wisp on the Horn;
I have chased it north to the Lizard--ribboned and rolled and torn;
I have spread its fold o'er the dying, adrift in a hopeless sea;
I have hurled it swift on the slaver, and seen the slave set free.

"My basking sunfish know it, and wheeling albatross,
Where the lone wave fills with fire beneath the Southern Cross.
What is the Flag of England?  Ye have but my reefs to dare,
Ye have but my seas to furrow.  Go forth, for it is there!"

The East Wind roared:--"From the Kuriles, the Bitter Seas, I come,
And me men call the Home-Wind, for I bring the English home.
Look--look well to your shipping!  By the breath of my mad typhoon
I swept your close-packed Praya and beached your best at Kowloon!

"The reeling junks behind me and the racing seas before,
I raped your richest roadstead--I plundered Singapore!
I set my hand on the Hoogli; as a hooded snake she rose,
And I flung your stoutest steamers to roost with the startled crows.

"Never the lotus closes, never the wild-fowl wake,
But a soul goes out on the East Wind that died for England's sake--
Man or woman or suckling, mother or bride or maid--
Because on the bones of the English the English Flag is stayed.

"The desert-dust hath dimmed it, the flying wild-ass knows,
The scared white leopard winds it across the taintless snows.
What is the Flag of England?  Ye have but my sun to dare,
Ye have but my sands to travel.  Go forth, for it is there!"

The West Wind called:--"In squadrons the thoughtless galleons fly
That bear the wheat and cattle lest street-bred people die.
They make my might their porter, they make my house their path,
Till I loose my neck from their rudder and whelm them all in my wrath.

"I draw the gliding fog-bank as a snake is drawn from the hole,
They bellow one to the other, the frighted ship-bells toll,
For day is a drifting terror till I raise the shroud with my breath,
And they see strange bows above them and the two go locked to death.

"But whether in calm or wrack-wreath, whether by dark or day,
I heave them whole to the conger or rip their plates away,
First of the scattered legions, under a shrieking sky,
Dipping between the rollers, the English Flag goes by.

"The dead dumb fog hath wrapped it--the frozen dews have kissed--
The naked stars have seen it, a fellow-star in the mist.
What is the Flag of England?  Ye have but my breath to dare,
Ye have but my waves to conquer.  Go forth, for it is there!"


"CLEARED"
(In Memory of a Commission)

Help for a patriot distressed, a spotless spirit hurt,
Help for an honorable clan sore trampled in the dirt!
From Queenstown Bay to Donegal, O listen to my song,
The honorable gentlemen have suffered grievous wrong.

Their noble names were mentioned--O the burning black disgrace!--
By a brutal Saxon paper in an Irish shooting-case;
They sat upon it for a year, then steeled their heart to brave it,
And "coruscating innocence" the learned Judges gave it.

Bear witness, Heaven, of that grim crime beneath the surgeon's knife,
The honorable gentlemen deplored the loss of life;
Bear witness of those chanting choirs that burk and shirk and snigger,
No man laid hand upon the knife or finger to the trigger!

Cleared in the face of all mankind beneath the winking skies,
Like phoenixes from Phoenix Park (and what lay there) they rise!
Go shout it to the emerald seas-give word to Erin now,
Her honorable gentlemen are cleared--and this is how:

They only paid the Moonlighter his cattle-hocking price,
They only helped the murderer with council's best advice,
But--sure it keeps their honor white--the learned Court believes
They never gave a piece of plate to murderers and thieves.

They ever told the ramping crowd to card a woman's hide,
They never marked a man for death--what fault of theirs he died?--
They only said "intimidate," and talked and went away--
By God, the boys that did the work were braver men than they!

Their sin it was that fed the fire--small blame to them that heard
The "bhoys" get drunk on rhetoric, and madden at the word--
They knew whom they were talking at, if they were Irish too,
The gentlemen that lied in Court, they knew and well they knew.

They only took the Judas-gold from Fenians out of jail,
They only fawned for dollars on the blood-dyed Clan-na-Gael.
If black is black or white is white, ill black and white it's down,
They're only traitors to the Queen and rebels to the Crown.

"Cleared," honorable gentlemen.  Be thankful it's no more:
The widow's curse is on your house, the dead are at your door.
On you the shame of open shame, on you from North to South
The band of every honest man flat-heeled across your mouth.

"Less black than we were painted"?--Faith, no word of black was said;
The lightest touch was human blood, and that, ye know, runs red.
It's sticking to your fist today for all your sneer and scoff,
And by the Judge's well-weighed word you cannot wipe it off.

Hold up those hands of innocence--go, scare your sheep, together,
The blundering, tripping tups that bleat behind the old bell-wether;
And if they snuff the taint and break to find another pen,
Tell them it's tar that glistens so, and daub them yours again!

"The charge is old"?--As old as Cain--as fresh as yesterday;
Old as the Ten Commandments, have ye talked those laws away?
If words are words, or death is death, or powder sends the ball,
You spoke the words that sped the shot--the curse be on you all.

"Our friends believe"? Of course they do--as sheltered women may;
But have they seen the shrieking soul ripped from the quivering clay?
They--If their own front door is shut, they'll swear the whole world's warm;
What do they know of dread of death or hanging fear of harm?

The secret half a country keeps, the whisper in the lane,
The shriek that tells the shot went home behind the broken pane,
The dry blood crisping in the sun that scares the honest bees,
And shows the "bhoys" have heard your talk--what do they know of these?

But you--you know--ay, ten times more; the secrets of the dead,
Black terror on the country-side by word and whisper bred,
The mangled stallion's scream at night, the tail-cropped heifer's low.
Who set the whisper going first? You know, and well you know!

My soul!  I'd sooner lie in jail for murder plain and straight,
Pure crime I'd done with my own hand for money, lust, or hate,
Than take a seat in Parliament by fellow-felons cheered,
While one of those "not provens" proved me cleared as you are cleared.

Cleared--you that "lost" the League accounts--go, guard our honor still,
Go, help to make our country's laws that broke God's laws at will--
One hand stuck out behind the back, to signal "strike again";
The other on your dress-shirt front to show your heart is @dane,

If black is black or white is white, in black and white it's down,
You're only traitors to the Queen and but rebels to the Crown
If print is print or words are words, the learned Court perpends:
We are not ruled by murderers, only--by their friends.


AN IMPERIAL RESCRIPT

Now this is the tale of the Council the German Kaiser decreed,
To ease the strong of their burden, to help the weak in their need,
He sent a word to the peoples, who struggle, and pant, and sweat,
That the straw might be counted fairly and the tally of bricks be set.

The Lords of Their Hands assembled; from the East and the West they drew--
Baltimore, Lille, and Essen, Brummagem, Clyde, and Crewe.
And some were black from the furnace, and some were brown from the soil,
And some were blue from the dye-vat; but all were wearied of toil.

And the young King said:--"I have found it, the road to the rest ye seek:
The strong shall wait for the weary, the hale shall halt for the weak;
With the even tramp of an army where no man breaks from the line,
Ye shall march to peace and plenty in the bond of brotherhood--sign!"

The paper lay on the table, the strong heads bowed thereby,
And a wail went up from the peoples:--"Ay, sign--give rest, for we die!"
A hand was stretched to the goose-quill, a fist was cramped to scrawl,
When--the laugh of a blue-eyed maiden ran clear through the council-hall.

And each one heard Her laughing as each one saw Her plain--
Saidie, Mimi, or Olga, Gretchen, or Mary Jane.
And the Spirit of Man that is in Him to the light of the vision woke;
And the men drew back from the paper, as a Yankee delegate spoke:--

"There's a girl in Jersey City who works on the telephone;
We're going to hitch our horses and dig for a house of our own,
With gas and water connections, and steam-heat through to the top;
And, W. Hohenzollern, I guess I shall work till I drop."

And an English delegate thundered:--"The weak an' the lame be blowed!
I've a berth in the Sou'-West workshops, a home in the Wandsworth Road;
And till the 'sociation has footed my buryin' bill,
I work for the kids an' the missus.  Pull up?  I be damned if I will!"

And over the German benches the bearded whisper ran:--
"Lager, der girls und der dollars, dey makes or dey breaks a man.
If Schmitt haf collared der dollars, he collars der girl deremit;
But if Schmitt bust in der pizness, we collars der girl from Schmitt."

They passed one resolution:--"Your sub-committee believe
You can lighten the curse of Adam when you've lightened the curse of Eve.
But till we are built like angels, with hammer and chisel and pen,
We will work for ourself and a woman, for ever and ever, amen."

Now this is the tale of the Council the German Kaiser held--
The day that they razored the Grindstone, the day that the Cat was belled,
The day of the Figs from Thistles, the day of the Twisted Sands,
The day that the laugh of a maiden made light of the Lords of Their Hands.


TOMLINSON

Now Tomlinson gave up the ghost in his house in Berkeley Square,
And a Spirit came to his bedside and gripped him by the hair--
A Spirit gripped him by the hair and carried him far away,
Till he heard as the roar of a rain-fed ford the roar of the Milky Way:
Till he heard the roar of the Milky Way die down and drone and cease,
And they came to the Gate within the Wall where Peter holds the keys.

"Stand up, stand up now, Tomlinson, and answer loud and high
The good that ye did for the sake of men or ever ye came to die--
The good that ye did for the sake of men in little earth so lone!"
And the naked soul of Tomlinson grew white as a rain-washed bone.

"O I have a friend on earth," he said, "that was my priest and guide,
And well would he answer all for me if he were by my side."
--"For that ye strove in neighbour-love it shall be written fair,
But now ye wait at Heaven's Gate and not in Berkeley Square:
Though we called your friend from his bed this night, he could not speak for
you,
For the race is run by one and one and never by two and two."
Then Tomlinson looked up and down, and little gain was there,
For the naked stars grinned overhead, and he saw that his soul was bare:
The Wind that blows between the worlds, it cut him like a knife,
And Tomlinson took up his tale and spoke of his good in life.

"This I have read in a book," he said, "and that was told to me,
And this I have thought that another man thought of a Prince in Muscovy."
The good souls flocked like homing doves and bade him clear the path,
And Peter twirled the jangling keys in weariness and wrath.

"Ye have read, ye have heard, ye have thought," he said, "and the tale is yet
to run:
By the worth of the body that once ye had, give answer--what ha'ye done?"
Then Tomlinson looked back and forth, and little good it bore,
For the Darkness stayed at his shoulder-blade and Heaven's Gate before:--
"O this I have felt, and this I have guessed, and this I have heard men say,
And this they wrote that another man wrote of a carl in Norroway."
--"Ye have read, ye have felt, ye have guessed, good lack! Ye have hampered
Heaven's Gate;
There's little room between the stars in idleness to prate!
O none may reach by hired speech of neighbour, priest, and kin
Through borrowed deed to God's good meed that lies so fair within;
Get hence, get hence to the Lord of Wrong, for doom has yet to run,
And. . .the faith that ye share with Berkeley Square uphold you, Tomlinson!"
*   *   *   *   *

The Spirit gripped him by the hair, and sun by sun they fell
Till they came to the belt of Naughty Stars that rim the mouth of Hell:
The first are red with pride and wrath, the next are white with pain,
But the third are black with clinkered sin that cannot burn again:
They may hold their path, they may leave their path, with never a soul to
mark,
They may burn or freeze, but they must not cease in the Scorn of the Outer
Dark.

The Wind that blows between the worlds, it nipped him to the bone,
And he yearned to the flare of Hell-Gate there as the light of his own hearth-
stone.

The Devil he sat behind the bars, where the desperate legions drew,
But he caught the hasting Tomlinson and would not let him through.

"Wot ye the price of good pit-coal that I must pay?" said he,
"That ye rank yoursel' so fit for Hell and ask no leave of me?
I am all o'er-sib to Adam's breed that ye should give me scorn,
For I strove with God for your First Father the day that he was born.

"Sit down, sit down upon the slag, and answer loud and high
The harm that ye did to the Sons of Men or ever you came to die."
And Tomlinson looked up and up, and saw against the night
The belly of a tortured star blood-red in Hell-Mouth light;
And Tomlinson looked down and down, and saw beneath his feet
The frontlet of a tortured star milk-white in Hell-Mouth heat.

"O I had a love on earth," said he, "that kissed me to my fall,
And if ye would call my love to me I know she would answer all."
--"All that ye did in love forbid it shall be written fair,
But now ye wait at Hell-Mouth Gate and not in Berkeley Square:
Though we whistled your love from her bed tonight, I trow she would not run,
For the sin ye do by two and two ye must pay for one by one!"
The Wind that blows between the worlds, it cut him like a knife,
And Tomlinson took up the tale and spoke of his sin in life:--
"Once I ha' laughed at the power of Love and twice at the grip of the Grave,
And thrice I ha' patted my God on the head that men might call me brave."
The Devil he blew on a brandered soul and set it aside to cool:--
"Do ye think I would waste my good pit-coal on the hide of a brain-sick fool?
I see no worth in the hobnailed mirth or the jolthead jest ye did
That I should waken my gentlemen that are sleeping three on a grid."
Then Tomlinson looked back and forth, and there was little grace,
For Hell-Gate filled the houseless Soul with the Fear of Naked Space.

"Nay, this I ha' heard," quo'  Tomlinson, "and this was noised abroad,
And this I ha' got from a Belgian book on the word of a dead French lord."
--"Ye ha' heard, ye ha' read, ye ha' got, good lack! and the tale begins
afresh--
Have ye sinned one sin for the pride o' the eye or the sinful lust of the
flesh?"
Then Tomlinson he gripped the bars and yammered, "Let me in--
For I mind that I borrowed my neighbour's wife to sin the deadly sin."
The Devil he grinned behind the bars, and banked the fires high:
"Did ye read of that sin in a book?" said he; and Tomlinson said, "Ay!"
The Devil he blew upon his nails, and the little devils ran,
And he said:  "Go husk this whimpering thief that comes in the guise of a man:
Winnow him out 'twixt star and star, and sieve his proper worth:
There's sore decline in Adam's line if this be spawn of earth."

Empusa's crew, so naked-new they may not face the fire,
But weep that they bin too small to sin to the height of their desire,
Over the coal they chased the Soul, and racked it all abroad,
As children rifle a caddis-case or the raven's foolish hoard.

And back they came with the tattered Thing, as children after play,
And they said:  "The soul that he got from God he has bartered clean away.

"We have threshed a stook of print and book, and winnowed a chattering wind
And many a soul wherefrom he stole, but his we cannot find:
We have handled him, we have dandled him, we have seared him to the bone,
And sure if tooth and nail show truth he has no soul of his own."
The Devil he bowed his head on his breast and rumbled deep and low:--
"I'm all o'er-sib to Adam's breed that I should bid him go.

"Yet close we lie, and deep we lie, and if I gave him place,
My gentlemen that are so proud would flout me to my face;
They'd call my house a common stews and me a careless host,
And--I would not anger my gentlemen for the sake of a shiftless ghost."
The Devil he looked at the mangled Soul that prayed to feel the flame,
And he thought of Holy Charity, but he thought of his own good name:--
"Now ye could haste my coal to waste, and sit ye down to fry:
Did ye think of that theft for yourself?" said he; and Tomlinson said, "Ay!"
The Devil he blew an outward breath, for his heart was free from care:--
"Ye have scarce the soul of a louse," he said, "but the roots of sin are
there,
And for that sin should ye come in were I the lord alone.
But sinful pride has rule inside--and mightier than my own.

"Honour and Wit, fore-damned they sit, to each his priest and whore:
Nay, scarce I dare myself go there, and you they'd torture sore.

"Ye are neither spirit nor spirk," he said; "ye are neither book nor brute--
Go, get ye back to the flesh again for the sake of Man's repute.

"I'm all o'er-sib to Adam's breed that I should mock your pain,
But look that ye win to worthier sin ere ye come back again.
Get hence, the hearse is at your door--the grim black stallions wait--
They bear your clay to place today.  Speed, lest ye come too late!
Go back to Earth with a lip unsealed--go back with an open eye,
And carry my word to the Sons of Men or ever ye come to die:
That the sin they do by two and two they must pay for one by one--
And. . .the God that you took from a printed book be with you, Tomlinson!"

*   *    *   *   *   *   *
               

BARRACK-ROOM BALLADS

 Dedication

     To T. A.

         I have made for you a song,
         And it may be right or wrong,
     But only you can tell me if it's true;
         I have tried for to explain
         Both your pleasure and your pain,
     And, Thomas, here's my best respects to you!

         O there'll surely come a day
         When they'll give you all your pay,
     And treat you as a Christian ought to do;
         So, until that day comes round,
         Heaven keep you safe and sound,
     And, Thomas, here's my best respects to you!
                          --R. K.

DANNY DEEVER

"What are the bugles blowin' for?" said Files-on-Parade.

"To turn you out, to turn you out", the Colour-Sergeant said.

"What makes you look so white, so white?" said Files-on-Parade.

"I'm dreadin' what I've got to watch", the Colour-Sergeant said.

    For they're hangin' Danny Deever, you can hear the Dead March play,
    The regiment's in 'ollow square--they're hangin' him today;
    They've taken of his buttons off an' cut his stripes away,
    An' they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.

"What makes the rear-rank breathe so 'ard?" said Files-on-Parade.

"It's bitter cold, it's bitter cold", the Colour-Sergeant said.

"What makes that front-rank man fall down?" said Files-on-Parade.

"A touch o' sun, a touch o' sun", the Colour-Sergeant said.

    They are hangin' Danny Deever, they are marchin' of 'im round,
    They 'ave 'alted Danny Deever by 'is coffin on the ground;
    An' 'e'll swing in 'arf a minute for a sneakin' shootin' hound--
    O they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'!

"'Is cot was right-'and cot to mine", said Files-on-Parade.

"'E's sleepin' out an' far tonight", the Colour-Sergeant said.

"I've drunk 'is beer a score o' times", said Files-on-Parade.

"'E's drinkin' bitter beer alone", the Colour-Sergeant said.

    They are hangin' Danny Deever, you must mark 'im to 'is place,
    For 'e shot a comrade sleepin'--you must look 'im in the face;
    Nine 'undred of 'is county an' the regiment's disgrace,
    While they're hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.

"What's that so black agin' the sun?" said Files-on-Parade.

"It's Danny fightin' 'ard for life", the Colour-Sergeant said.

"What's that that whimpers over'ead?" said Files-on-Parade.

"It's Danny's soul that's passin' now", the Colour-Sergeant said.

    For they're done with Danny Deever, you can 'ear the quickstep play,
    The regiment's in column, an' they're marchin' us away;
    Ho! the young recruits are shakin', an' they'll want their beer today,
    After hangin' Danny Deever in the mornin'.


TOMMY

I went into a public-'ouse to get a pint o' beer,
The publican 'e up an' sez, "We serve no red-coats here."
The girls be'ind the bar they laughed an' giggled fit to die,
I outs into the street again an' to myself sez I:
    O it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Tommy, go away";
    But it's "Thank you, Mister Atkins", when the band begins to play,
    The band begins to play, my boys, the band begins to play,
    O it's "Thank you, Mister Atkins", when the band begins to play.

I went into a theatre as sober as could be,
They gave a drunk civilian room, but 'adn't none for me;
They sent me to the gallery or round the music-'alls,
But when it comes to fightin', Lord! they'll shove me in the stalls!
    For it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Tommy, wait outside";
    But it's "Special train for Atkins" when the trooper's on the tide,
    The troopship's on the tide, my boys, the troopship's on the tide,
    O it's "Special train for Atkins" when the trooper's on the tide.

Yes, makin' mock o' uniforms that guard you while you sleep
Is cheaper than them uniforms, an' they're starvation cheap;
An' hustlin' drunken soldiers when they're goin' large a bit
Is five times better business than paradin' in full kit.

    Then it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Tommy, 'ow's yer soul?"
    But it's "Thin red line of 'eroes" when the drums begin to roll,
    The drums begin to roll, my boys, the drums begin to roll,
    O it's "Thin red line of 'eroes" when the drums begin to roll.

We aren't no thin red 'eroes, nor we aren't no blackguards too,
But single men in barricks, most remarkable like you;
An' if sometimes our conduck isn't all your fancy paints,
Why, single men in barricks don't grow into plaster saints;
    While it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Tommy, fall be'ind",
    But it's "Please to walk in front, sir", when there's trouble in the wind,
    There's trouble in the wind, my boys, there's trouble in the wind,
    O it's "Please to walk in front, sir", when there's trouble in the wind.

You talk o' better food for us, an' schools, an' fires, an' all:
We'll wait for extry rations if you treat us rational.
Don't mess about the cook-room slops, but prove it to our face
The Widow's Uniform is not the soldier-man's disgrace.

    For it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' "Chuck him out, the brute!"
    But it's "Saviour of 'is country" when the guns begin to shoot;
    An' it's Tommy this, an' Tommy that, an' anything you please;
    An' Tommy ain't a bloomin' fool--you bet that Tommy sees!


FUZZY-WUZZY
(Soudan Expeditionary Force)

We've fought with many men acrost the seas,
  An' some of 'em was brave an' some was not:
The Paythan an' the Zulu an' Burmese;
  But the Fuzzy was the finest o' the lot.

We never got a ha'porth's change of 'im:
  'E squatted in the scrub an' 'ocked our 'orses,
'E cut our sentries up at Suakim,
  An' 'e played the cat an' banjo with our forces.

    So 'ere's to you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, at your 'ome in the Soudan;
    You're a pore benighted 'eathen but a first-class fightin' man;
    We gives you your certificate, an' if you want it signed
    We'll come an' 'ave a romp with you whenever you're inclined.

We took our chanst among the Khyber 'ills,
  The Boers knocked us silly at a mile,
The Burman give us Irriwaddy chills,
  An' a Zulu impi dished us up in style:
But all we ever got from such as they
  Was pop to what the Fuzzy made us swaller;
We 'eld our bloomin' own, the papers say,
  But man for man the Fuzzy knocked us 'oller.

    Then 'ere's to you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, an' the missis and the kid;
    Our orders was to break you, an' of course we went an' did.
    We sloshed you with Martinis, an' it wasn't 'ardly fair;
    But for all the odds agin' you, Fuzzy-Wuz, you broke the square.

'E 'asn't got no papers of 'is own,
  'E 'asn't got no medals nor rewards,
So we must certify the skill 'e's shown
  In usin' of 'is long two-'anded swords:
When 'e's 'oppin' in an' out among the bush
  With 'is coffin-'eaded shield an' shovel-spear,
An 'appy day with Fuzzy on the rush
  Will last an 'ealthy Tommy for a year.

    So 'ere's to you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, an' your friends which are no more,
    If we 'adn't lost some messmates we would 'elp you to deplore;
    But give an' take's the gospel, an' we'll call the bargain fair,
    For if you 'ave lost more than us, you crumpled up the square!

'E rushes at the smoke when we let drive,
  An', before we know, 'e's 'ackin' at our 'ead;
'E's all 'ot sand an' ginger when alive,
  An' 'e's generally shammin' when 'e's dead.

'E's a daisy, 'e's a ducky, 'e's a lamb!
  'E's a injia-rubber idiot on the spree,
'E's the on'y thing that doesn't give a damn
  For a Regiment o' British Infantree!
    So 'ere's to you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, at your 'ome in the Soudan;
    You're a pore benighted 'eathen but a first-class fightin' man;
    An' 'ere's to you, Fuzzy-Wuzzy, with your 'ayrick 'ead of 'air--
    You big black boundin' beggar--for you broke a British square!


SOLDIER, SOLDIER

"Soldier, soldier come from the wars,
Why don't you march with my true love?"
"We're fresh from off the ship an' 'e's maybe give the slip,
An' you'd best go look for a new love."
    New love!  True love!
    Best go look for a new love,
    The dead they cannot rise, an' you'd better dry your eyes,
    An' you'd best go look for a new love.

"Soldier, soldier come from the wars,
What did you see o' my true love?"
"I seed 'im serve the Queen in a suit o' rifle-green,
An' you'd best go look for a new love."

"Soldier, soldier come from the wars,
Did ye see no more o' my true love?"
"I seed 'im runnin' by when the shots begun to fly--
But you'd best go look for a new love."

"Soldier, soldier come from the wars,
Did aught take 'arm to my true love?"
"I couldn't see the fight, for the smoke it lay so white--
An' you'd best go look for a new love."

"Soldier, soldier come from the wars,
I'll up an' tend to my true love!"
"'E's lying on the dead with a bullet through 'is 'ead,
An' you'd best go look for a new love."

"Soldier, soldier come from the wars,
I'll down an' die with my true love!"
"The pit we dug'll 'ide 'im an' the twenty men beside 'im--
An' you'd best go look for a new love."

"Soldier, soldier come from the wars,
Do you bring no sign from my true love?"
"I bring a lock of 'air that 'e allus used to wear,
An' you'd best go look for a new love."

"Soldier, soldier come from the wars,
O then I know it's true I've lost my true love!"
"An' I tell you truth again--when you've lost the feel o' pain
You'd best take me for your true love."
    True love!  New love!
    Best take 'im for a new love,
    The dead they cannot rise, an' you'd better dry your eyes,
    An' you'd best take 'im for your true love.


SCREW-GUNS

Smokin' my pipe on the mountings,
           sniffin' the mornin' cool,
I walks in my old brown gaiters
           along o' my old brown mule,
With seventy gunners be'ind me,
           an' never a beggar forgets
It's only the pick of the Army
           that handles the dear little pets--'Tss! 'Tss!
    For you all love the screw-guns--the screw-guns they all love you!
    So when we call round with a few guns,
              o' course you will know what to do--hoo! hoo!
    Jest send in your Chief an' surrender--
              it's worse if you fights or you runs:
    You can go where you please, you can skid up the trees,
              but you don't get away from the guns!

They sends us along where the roads are, but mostly we goes where they ain't:
We'd climb up the side of a sign-board an' trust to the stick o' the paint:
We've chivied the Naga an' Looshai,
          we've give the Afreedeeman fits,
For we fancies ourselves at two thousand,
          we guns that are built in two bits--'Tss! 'Tss!
    For you all love the screw-guns . . .

If a man doesn't work, why, we drills 'im
          an' teaches 'im 'ow to behave;
If a beggar can't march, why, we kills 'im
          an' rattles 'im into 'is grave.
You've got to stand up to our business
          an' spring without snatchin' or fuss.
D'you say that you sweat with the field-guns?
          By God, you must lather with us--'Tss! 'Tss!
    For you all love the screw-guns . . .

The eagles is screamin' around us,
          the river's a-moanin' below,
We're clear o' the pine an' the oak-scrub,
          we're out on the rocks an' the snow,
An' the wind is as thin as a whip-lash
          what carries away to the plains
The rattle an' stamp o' the lead-mules--
          the jinglety-jink o' the chains--'Tss! 'Tss!
    For you all love the screw-guns . . .

There's a wheel on the Horns o' the Mornin',
          an' a wheel on the edge o' the Pit,
An' a drop into nothin' beneath you as straight as a beggar can spit:
With the sweat runnin' out o' your shirt-sleeves, 
          an' the sun off the snow in your face,
An' 'arf o' the men on the drag-ropes
          to hold the old gun in 'er place--'Tss! 'Tss!
    For you all love the screw-guns . . .

Smokin' my pipe on the mountings,
           sniffin' the mornin' cool,
I climbs in my old brown gaiters
           along o' my old brown mule.
The monkey can say what our road was--
           the wild-goat 'e knows where we passed.

Stand easy, you long-eared old darlin's!
           Out drag-ropes!  With shrapnel!  Hold fast--'Tss! 'Tss!

    For you all love the screw-guns--the screw-guns they all love
you!
    So when we take tea with a few guns,
              o' course you will know what to do--hoo! hoo!
    Jest send in your Chief an' surrender--
              it's worse if you fights or you runs:
    You may hide in the caves, they'll be only your graves,
              but you can't get away from the guns!


GUNGA DIN

You may talk o' gin and beer
When you're quartered safe out 'ere,
An' you're sent to penny-fights an' Aldershot it;
But when it comes to slaughter
You will do your work on water,
An' you'll lick the bloomin' boots of 'im that's got it.

Now in Injia's sunny clime,
Where I used to spend my time
A-servin' of 'Er Majesty the Queen,
Of all them blackfaced crew
The finest man I knew
Was our regimental bhisti, Gunga Din.

      He was "Din! Din! Din!
  You limpin' lump o' brick-dust, Gunga Din!
      Hi! slippy hitherao!
      Water, get it!  Panee lao!1
  You squidgy-nosed old idol, Gunga Din."

The uniform 'e wore
Was nothin' much before,
An' rather less than 'arf o' that be'ind,
For a piece o' twisty rag
An' a goatskin water-bag
Was all the field-equipment 'e could find.

When the sweatin' troop-train lay
In a sidin' through the day,
Where the 'eat would make your bloomin' eyebrows crawl,
We shouted "Harry By!" 2
Till our throats were bricky-dry,
Then we wopped 'im 'cause 'e couldn't serve us all.

      It was "Din! Din! Din!
  You 'eathen, where the mischief 'ave you been?
      You put some juldee 3 in it
      Or I'll marrow 4 you this minute
  If you don't fill up my helmet, Gunga Din!"

'E would dot an' carry one
Till the longest day was done;
An' 'e didn't seem to know the use o' fear.

If we charged or broke or cut,
You could bet your bloomin' nut,
'E'd be waitin' fifty paces right flank rear.
With 'is mussick 5 on 'is back,
'E would skip with our attack,
An' watch us till the bugles made "Retire",
An' for all 'is dirty 'ide
'E was white, clear white, inside
When 'e went to tend the wounded under fire!
      It was "Din! Din! Din!"
  With the bullets kickin' dust-spots on the green.

      When the cartridges ran out,
      You could hear the front-files shout,
  "Hi! ammunition-mules an' Gunga Din!"

I shan't forgit the night
When I dropped be'ind the fight
With a bullet where my belt-plate should 'a' been.
I was chokin' mad with thirst,
An' the man that spied me first
Was our good old grinnin', gruntin' Gunga Din.
'E lifted up my 'ead,
An' he plugged me where I bled,
An' 'e guv me 'arf-a-pint o' water-green:
It was crawlin' and it stunk,
But of all the drinks I've drunk,
I'm gratefullest to one from Gunga Din.

      It was "Din! Din! Din!
  'Ere's a beggar with a bullet through 'is spleen;
      'E's chawin' up the ground,
      An' 'e's kickin' all around:
  For Gawd's sake git the water, Gunga Din!"

'E carried me away
To where a dooli lay,
An' a bullet come an' drilled the beggar clean.
'E put me safe inside,
An' just before 'e died,
"I 'ope you liked your drink", sez Gunga Din.
So I'll meet 'im later on
At the place where 'e is gone--
Where it's always double drill and no canteen;
'E'll be squattin' on the coals
Givin' drink to poor damned souls,
An' I'll get a swig in hell from Gunga Din!
      Yes, Din! Din! Din!
  You Lazarushian-leather Gunga Din!
      Though I've belted you and flayed you,
      By the livin' Gawd that made you,
  You're a better man than I am, Gunga Din!

1 Bring water swiftly.
2 Mr Atkins' equivalent for "O Brother."
3 Hit you.
4 Be quick.
5 Water skin.


OONTS
(Northern India Transport Train)

Wot makes the soldier's 'eart to @penk, wot makes 'im to perspire?
It isn't standin' up to charge nor lyin' down to fire;
But it's everlastin' waitin' on a everlastin' road
For the commissariat camel an' 'is commissariat load.
    O the oont, 1 O the oont, O the commissariat oont!
     With 'is silly neck a-bobbin' like a basket full o' snakes;
    We packs 'im like an idol, an' you ought to 'ear 'im grunt,
     An' when we gets 'im loaded up 'is blessed girth-rope breaks.

Wot makes the rear-guard swear so 'ard when night is drorin' in,
An' every native follower is shiverin' for 'is skin?
It ain't the chanst o' being rushed by Paythans from the 'ills,
It's the commissariat camel puttin' on 'is bloomin' frills!
    O the oont, O the oont, O the hairy scary oont!
     A-trippin' over tent-ropes when we've got the night alarm!
    We socks 'im with a stretcher-pole an' 'eads 'im off in front,
     An' when we've saved 'is bloomin' life 'e chaws our bloomin' arm.

The 'orse 'e knows above a bit, the bullock's but a fool,
The elephant's a gentleman, the battery-mule's a mule;
But the commissariat cam-u-el, when all is said an' done,
'E's a devil an' a ostrich an' a orphan-child in one.
    O the oont, O the oont, O the Gawd-forsaken oont!
     The lumpy-'umpy 'ummin'-bird a-singin' where 'e lies,
    'E's blocked the whole division from the rear-guard to the front,
     An' when we get him up again--the beggar goes an' dies!

'E'll gall an' chafe an' lame an' fight--'e smells most awful vile;
'E'll lose 'isself for ever if you let 'im stray a mile;
'E's game to graze the 'ole day long an' 'owl the 'ole night through,
An' when 'e comes to greasy ground 'e splits 'isself in two.
    O the oont, O the oont, O the floppin', droppin' oont!
     When 'is long legs give from under an' 'is meltin' eye is dim,
    The tribes is up be'ind us, and the tribes is out in front--
     It ain't no jam for Tommy, but it's kites an' crows for 'im.

So when the cruel march is done, an' when the roads is blind,
An' when we sees the camp in front an' 'ears the shots be'ind,
Ho! then we strips 'is saddle off, and all 'is woes is past:
'E thinks on us that used 'im so, and gets revenge at last.
    O the oont, O the oont, O the floatin', bloatin' oont!
     The late lamented camel in the water-cut 'e lies;
    We keeps a mile be'ind 'im an' we keeps a mile in front,
     But 'e gets into the drinkin'-casks, and then o' course we dies.

1Camel--oo is pronounced like u in "bull," but by Mr. Atkins to
rhyme with "front."


LOOT

If you've ever stole a pheasant-egg be'ind the keeper's back,
 If you've ever snigged the washin' from the line,
If you've ever crammed a gander in your bloomin' 'aversack,
 You will understand this little song o' mine.

But the service rules are 'ard, an' from such we are debarred,
 For the same with English morals does not suit.

    (Cornet:  Toot! toot!)
W'y, they call a man a robber if 'e stuffs 'is marchin' clobber
 With the--
(Chorus)  Loo! loo!  Lulu! lulu!  Loo! loo!  Loot! loot! loot!
               Ow the loot!
               Bloomin' loot!
            That's the thing to make the boys git up an' shoot!
             It's the same with dogs an' men,
             If you'd make 'em come again
            Clap 'em forward with a Loo! loo! Lulu! Loot!
    (ff)  Whoopee!  Tear 'im, puppy!  Loo! loo! Lulu!  Loot! loot! loot!

If you've knocked a nigger edgeways when 'e's thrustin' for your life,
 You must leave 'im very careful where 'e fell;
An' may thank your stars an' gaiters if you didn't feel 'is knife
 That you ain't told off to bury 'im as well.

Then the sweatin' Tommies wonder as they spade the beggars under
 Why lootin' should be entered as a crime;
So if my song you'll 'ear, I will learn you plain an' clear
 'Ow to pay yourself for fightin' overtime.

(Chorus)  With the loot, . . .

Now remember when you're 'acking round a gilded Burma god
 That 'is eyes is very often precious stones;
An' if you treat a nigger to a dose o' cleanin'-rod
 'E's like to show you everything 'e owns.

When 'e won't prodooce no more, pour some water on the floor
 Where you 'ear it answer 'ollow to the boot
    (Cornet:  Toot! toot!)--
When the ground begins to sink, shove your baynick down the chink,
 An' you're sure to touch the--
(Chorus)  Loo! loo!  Lulu!   Loot! loot! loot!
               Ow the loot! . . .

When from 'ouse to 'ouse you're 'unting, you must always work in pairs--
 It 'alves the gain, but safer you will find--
For a single man gets bottled on them twisty-wisty stairs,
 An' a woman comes and clobs 'im from be'ind.

When you've turned 'em inside out, an' it seems beyond a doubt
 As if there weren't enough to dust a flute
    (Cornet:  Toot! toot!)--
Before you sling your 'ook, at the 'ousetops take a look,
 For it's underneath the tiles they 'ide the loot.

(Chorus)  Ow the loot! . . .

You can mostly square a Sergint an' a Quartermaster too,
 If you only take the proper way to go;
I could never keep my pickin's, but I've learned you all I knew--
 An' don't you never say I told you so.

An' now I'll bid good-bye, for I'm gettin' rather dry,
 An' I see another tunin' up to toot
    (Cornet:  Toot! toot!)--
So 'ere's good-luck to those that wears the Widow's clo'es,
 An' the Devil send 'em all they want o' loot!
(Chorus)     Yes, the loot,
               Bloomin' loot!
            In the tunic an' the mess-tin an' the boot!
             It's the same with dogs an' men,
             If you'd make 'em come again
   (fff)  Whoop 'em forward with a Loo! loo!  Lulu!  Loot! loot! loot!
            Heeya!  Sick 'im, puppy!  Loo! loo!  Lulu!  Loot! loot! loot!


'SNARLEYOW'

This 'appened in a battle to a batt'ry of the corps
Which is first among the women an' amazin' first in war;
An' what the bloomin' battle was I don't remember now,
But Two's off-lead 'e answered to the name o' Snarleyow.

    Down in the Infantry, nobody cares;
    Down in the Cavalry, Colonel 'e swears;
    But down in the lead with the wheel at the flog
    Turns the bold Bombardier to a little whipped dog!

They was movin' into action, they was needed very sore,
To learn a little schoolin' to a native army corps,
They 'ad nipped against an uphill, they was tuckin' down the brow,
When a tricky, trundlin' roundshot give the knock to Snarleyow.

They cut 'im loose an' left 'im--'e was almost tore in two--
But he tried to follow after as a well-trained 'orse should do;
'E went an' fouled the limber, an' the Driver's Brother squeals:
"Pull up, pull up for Snarleyow--'is head's between 'is 'eels!"

The Driver 'umped 'is shoulder, for the wheels was goin' round,
An' there ain't no "Stop, conductor!" when a batt'ry's changin' ground;
Sez 'e:  "I broke the beggar in, an' very sad I feels,
But I couldn't pull up, not for you--your 'ead between your 'eels!"

'E 'adn't 'ardly spoke the word, before a droppin' shell
A little right the batt'ry an' between the sections fell;
An' when the smoke 'ad cleared away, before the limber wheels,
There lay the Driver's Brother with 'is 'ead between 'is 'eels.

Then sez the Driver's Brother, an' 'is words was very plain,
"For Gawd's own sake get over me, an' put me out o' pain."
They saw 'is wounds was mortial, an' they judged that it was best,
So they took an' drove the limber straight across 'is back an' chest.

The Driver 'e give nothin' 'cept a little coughin' grunt,
But 'e swung 'is 'orses 'andsome when it came to "Action Front!"
An' if one wheel was juicy, you may lay your Monday head
'Twas juicier for the niggers when the case begun to spread.

The moril of this story, it is plainly to be seen:
You 'avn't got no families when servin' of the Queen--
You 'avn't got no brothers, fathers, sisters, wives, or sons--
If you want to win your battles take an' work your bloomin' guns!

    Down in the Infantry, nobody cares;
    Down in the Cavalry, Colonel 'e swears;
    But down in the lead with the wheel at the flog
    Turns the bold Bombardier to a little whipped dog!


THE WIDOW AT WINDSOR

'Ave you 'eard o' the Widow at Windsor
 With a hairy gold crown on 'er 'ead?
She 'as ships on the foam--she 'as millions at 'ome,
 An' she pays us poor beggars in red.
    (Ow, poor beggars in red!)

There's 'er nick on the cavalry 'orses,
 There's 'er mark on the medical stores--
An' 'er troopers you'll find with a fair wind be'ind
 That takes us to various wars.
    (Poor beggars!--barbarious wars!)
       Then 'ere's to the Widow at Windsor,
        An' 'ere's to the stores an' the guns,
       The men an' the 'orses what makes up the forces
        O' Missis Victorier's sons.
       (Poor beggars! Victorier's sons!)

Walk wide o' the Widow at Windsor,
 For 'alf o' Creation she owns:
We 'ave bought 'er the same with the sword an' the flame,
 An' we've salted it down with our bones.
    (Poor beggars!--it's blue with our bones!)
Hands off o' the sons o' the Widow,
 Hands off o' the goods in 'er shop,
For the Kings must come down an' the Emperors frown
 When the Widow at Windsor says "Stop"!
    (Poor beggars!--we're sent to say "Stop"!)
       Then 'ere's to the Lodge o' the Widow,
        From the Pole to the Tropics it runs--
       To the Lodge that we tile with the rank an' the file,
        An' open in form with the guns.
       (Poor beggars!--it's always they guns!)

We 'ave 'eard o' the Widow at Windsor,
 It's safest to let 'er alone:
For 'er sentries we stand by the sea an' the land
 Wherever the bugles are blown.
    (Poor beggars!--an' don't we get blown!)
Take 'old o' the Wings o' the Mornin',
 An' flop round the earth till you're dead;
But you won't get away from the tune that they play
 To the bloomin' old rag over'ead.
    (Poor beggars!--it's 'ot over'ead!)
       Then 'ere's to the sons o' the Widow,
        Wherever, 'owever they roam.
       'Ere's all they desire, an' if they require
        A speedy return to their 'ome.
       (Poor beggars!--they'll never see 'ome!)


BELTS

There was a row in Silver Street that's near to Dublin Quay,
Between an Irish regiment an' English cavalree;
It started at Revelly an' it lasted on till dark:
The first man dropped at Harrison's, the last forninst the Park.

    For it was:--"Belts, belts, belts, an' that's one for you!"
    An' it was "Belts, belts, belts, an' that's done for you!"
    O buckle an' tongue
    Was the song that we sung
    From Harrison's down to the Park!

There was a row in Silver Street--the regiments was out,
They called us "Delhi Rebels", an' we answered "Threes about!"
That drew them like a hornet's nest--we met them good an' large,
The English at the double an' the Irish at the charge.

    Then it was:--"Belts . . .

There was a row in Silver Street--an' I was in it too;
We passed the time o' day, an' then the belts went whirraru!
I misremember what occurred, but subsequint the storm
A Freeman's Journal Supplemint was all my uniform.

    O it was:--"Belts . . .


There was a row in Silver Street--they sent the Polis there,
The English were too drunk to know, the Irish didn't care;
But when they grew impertinint we simultaneous rose,
Till half o' them was Liffey mud an' half was tatthered clo'es.

    For it was:--"Belts . . .

There was a row in Silver Street--it might ha' raged till now,
But some one drew his side-arm clear, an' nobody knew how;
'Twas Hogan took the point an' dropped; we saw the red blood run:
An' so we all was murderers that started out in fun.

    While it was:--"Belts . . .

There was a row in Silver Street--but that put down the shine,
Wid each man whisperin' to his next: "'Twas never work o' mine!"
We went away like beaten dogs, an' down the street we bore him,
The poor dumb corpse that couldn't tell the bhoys were sorry for him.

    When it was:--"Belts . . .

There was a row in Silver Street--it isn't over yet,
For half of us are under guard wid punishments to get;
'Tis all a merricle to me as in the Clink I lie:
There was a row in Silver Street--begod, I wonder why!

    But it was:--"Belts, belts, belts, an' that's one for you!"
    An' it was "Belts, belts, belts, an' that's done for you!"
    O buckle an' tongue
    Was the song that we sung
    From Harrison's down to the Park!


THE YOUNG BRITISH SOLDIER

When the 'arf-made recruity goes out to the East
'E acts like a babe an' 'e drinks like a beast,
An' 'e wonders because 'e is frequent deceased
   Ere 'e's fit for to serve as a soldier.

      Serve, serve, serve as a soldier,
      Serve, serve, serve as a soldier,
      Serve, serve, serve as a soldier,
         So-oldier of the Queen!

Now all you recruities what's drafted today,
You shut up your rag-box an' 'ark to my lay,
An' I'll sing you a soldier as far as I may:
   A soldier what's fit for a soldier.

      Fit, fit, fit for a soldier . . .

First mind you steer clear o' the grog-sellers' huts,
For they sell you Fixed Bay'nets that rots out your guts--
Ay, drink that 'ud eat the live steel from your butts--
   An' it's bad for the young British soldier.

      Bad, bad, bad for the soldier . . .

When the cholera comes--as it will past a doubt--
Keep out of the wet and don't go on the shout,
For the sickness gets in as the liquor dies out,
   An' it crumples the young British soldier.

      Crum-, crum-, crumples the soldier . . .

But the worst o' your foes is the sun over'ead:
You must wear your 'elmet for all that is said:
If 'e finds you uncovered 'e'll knock you down dead,
   An' you'll die like a fool of a soldier.

      Fool, fool, fool of a soldier . . .

If you're cast for fatigue by a sergeant unkind,
Don't grouse like a woman nor crack on nor blind;
Be handy and civil, and then you will find
   That it's beer for the young British soldier.

      Beer, beer, beer for the soldier . . .

Now, if you must marry, take care she is old--
A troop-sergeant's widow's the nicest I'm told,
For beauty won't help if your rations is cold,
   Nor love ain't enough for a soldier.

      'Nough, 'nough, 'nough for a soldier . . .

If the wife should go wrong with a comrade, be loath
To shoot when you catch 'em--you'll swing, on my oath!--
Make 'im take 'er and keep 'er:  that's Hell for them both,
   An' you're shut o' the curse of a soldier.

      Curse, curse, curse of a soldier . . .

When first under fire an' you're wishful to duck,
Don't look nor take 'eed at the man that is struck,
Be thankful you're livin', and trust to your luck
   And march to your front like a soldier.

      Front, front, front like a soldier . . .

When 'arf of your bullets fly wide in the ditch,
Don't call your Martini a cross-eyed old bitch;
She's human as you are--you treat her as sich,
   An' she'll fight for the young British soldier.

      Fight, fight, fight for the soldier . . .

When shakin' their bustles like ladies so fine,
The guns o' the enemy wheel into line,
Shoot low at the limbers an' don't mind the shine,
   For noise never startles the soldier.

      Start-, start-, startles the soldier . . .

If your officer's dead and the sergeants look white,
Remember it's ruin to run from a fight:
So take open order, lie down, and sit tight,
   And wait for supports like a soldier.

      Wait, wait, wait like a soldier . . .

When you're wounded and left on Afghanistan's plains,
And the women come out to cut up what remains,
Jest roll to your rifle and blow out your brains
   An' go to your Gawd like a soldier.

      Go, go, go like a soldier,
      Go, go, go like a soldier,
      Go, go, go like a soldier,
         So-oldier of the Queen!


MANDALAY

By the old Moulmein Pagoda, lookin' lazy at the sea,
There's a Burma girl a-settin', and I know she thinks o' me;
For the wind is in the palm-trees, and the temple-bells they say:
"Come you back, you British soldier; come you back to Mandalay!"
    Come you back to Mandalay,
    Where the old Flotilla lay:
    Can't you 'ear their paddles chunkin' from Rangoon to Mandalay?
    On the road to Mandalay,
    Where the flyin'-fishes play,
    An' the dawn comes up like thunder outer China 'crost the Bay!

'Er petticoat was yaller an' 'er little cap was green,
An' 'er name was Supi-yaw-lat--jes' the same as Theebaw's Queen,
An' I seed her first a-smokin' of a whackin' white cheroot,
An' a-wastin' Christian kisses on an 'eathen idol's foot:
    Bloomin' idol made o'mud--
    Wot they called the Great Gawd Budd--
    Plucky lot she cared for idols when I kissed 'er where she stud!
    On the road to Mandalay . . .

When the mist was on the rice-fields an' the sun was droppin' slow,
She'd git 'er little banjo an' she'd sing "Kulla-lo-lo!"
With 'er arm upon my shoulder an' 'er cheek agin' my cheek
We useter watch the steamers an' the hathis pilin' teak.
    Elephints a-pilin' teak
    In the sludgy, squdgy creek,
    Where the silence 'ung that 'eavy you was 'arf afraid to speak!
    On the road to Mandalay . . .

But that's all shove be'ind me--long ago an' fur away,
An' there ain't no 'busses runnin' from the Bank to Mandalay;
An' I'm learnin' 'ere in London what the ten-year soldier tells:
"If you've 'eard the East a-callin', you won't never 'eed naught else."
    No! you won't 'eed nothin' else
    But them spicy garlic smells,
    An' the sunshine an' the palm-trees an' the tinkly temple-bells;
    On the road to Mandalay . . .

I am sick o' wastin' leather on these gritty pavin'-stones,
An' the blasted Henglish drizzle wakes the fever in my bones;
Tho' I walks with fifty 'ousemaids outer Chelsea to the Strand,
An' they talks a lot o' lovin', but wot do they understand?
    Beefy face an' grubby 'and--
    Law! wot do they understand?
    I've a neater, sweeter maiden in a cleaner, greener land!
    On the road to Mandalay . . .

Ship me somewheres east of Suez, where the best is like the worst,
Where there aren't no Ten Commandments an' a man can raise a thirst;
For the temple-bells are callin', an' it's there that I would be--
By the old Moulmein Pagoda, looking lazy at the sea;
    On the road to Mandalay,
    Where the old Flotilla lay,
    With our sick beneath the awnings when we went to Mandalay!
    On the road to Mandalay,
    Where the flyin'-fishes play,
    An' the dawn comes up like thunder outer China 'crost the Bay!


TROOPIN'
(Our Army in the East)

Troopin', troopin', troopin' to the sea:
'Ere's September come again--the six-year men are free.
O leave the dead be'ind us, for they cannot come away
To where the ship's a-coalin' up that takes us 'ome today.

   We're goin' 'ome, we're goin' 'ome,
    Our ship is at the shore,
   An' you must pack your 'aversack,
    For we won't come back no more.

   Ho, don't you grieve for me,
    My lovely Mary-Ann,
   For I'll marry you yit on a fourp'ny bit
    As a time-expired man.

The Malabar's in 'arbour with the Jumner at 'er tail,
An' the time-expired's waitin' of 'is orders for to sail.
Ho! the weary waitin' when on Khyber 'ills we lay,
But the time-expired's waitin' of 'is orders 'ome today.

They'll turn us out at Portsmouth wharf in cold an' wet an' rain,
All wearin' Injian cotton kit, but we will not complain;
They'll kill us of pneumonia--for that's their little way--
But damn the chills and fever, men, we're goin' 'ome today!

Troopin', troopin', winter's round again!
See the new draf's pourin' in for the old campaign;
Ho, you poor recruities, but you've got to earn your pay--
What's the last from Lunnon, lads?  We're goin' there today.

Troopin', troopin', give another cheer--
'Ere's to English women an' a quart of English beer.
The Colonel an' the regiment an' all who've got to stay,
Gawd's mercy strike 'em gentle--Whoop! we're goin' 'ome today.

    We're goin' 'ome, we're goin' 'ome,
     Our ship is at the shore,
    An' you must pack your 'aversack,
     For we won't come back no more.

    Ho, don't you grieve for me,
     My lovely Mary-Ann,
    For I'll marry you yit on a fourp'ny bit
     As a time-expired man.


FORD O' KABUL RIVER

Kabul town's by Kabul river--
 Blow the bugle, draw the sword--
There I lef' my mate for ever,
 Wet an' drippin' by the ford.
    Ford, ford, ford o' Kabul river,
     Ford o' Kabul river in the dark!
    There's the river up and brimmin', an' there's 'arf a squadron swimmin'
     'Cross the ford o' Kabul river in the dark.

Kabul town's a blasted place--
 Blow the bugle, draw the sword--
'Strewth I sha'n't forget 'is face
 Wet an' drippin' by the ford!
    Ford, ford, ford o' Kabul river,
     Ford o' Kabul river in the dark!
    Keep the crossing-stakes beside you, an' they will surely guide you
     'Cross the ford o' Kabul river in the dark.

Kabul town is sun and dust--
 Blow the bugle, draw the sword--
I'd ha' sooner drownded fust
 'Stead of 'im beside the ford.
    Ford, ford, ford o' Kabul river,
     Ford o' Kabul river in the dark!
    You can 'ear the 'orses threshin', you can 'ear the men a-splashin',
     'Cross the ford o' Kabul river in the dark.

Kabul town was ours to take--
 Blow the bugle, draw the sword--
I'd ha' left it for 'is sake--
 'Im that left me by the ford.
    Ford, ford, ford o' Kabul river,
     Ford o' Kabul river in the dark!
    It's none so bloomin' dry there; ain't you never comin' nigh there,
     'Cross the ford o' Kabul river in the dark?

Kabul town'll go to hell--
 Blow the bugle, draw the sword--
'Fore I see him 'live an' well--
 'Im the best beside the ford.
    Ford, ford, ford o' Kabul river,
     Ford o' Kabul river in the dark!
    Gawd 'elp 'em if they blunder, for their boots'll pull 'em under,
     By the ford o' Kabul river in the dark.

Turn your 'orse from Kabul town--
 Blow the bugle, draw the sword--
'Im an' 'arf my troop is down,
 Down an' drownded by the ford.
    Ford, ford, ford o' Kabul river,
     Ford o' Kabul river in the dark!
    There's the river low an' fallin', but it ain't no use o' callin'
     'Cross the ford o' Kabul river in the dark.


ROUTE MARCHIN'

We're marchin' on relief over Injia's sunny plains,
A little front o' Christmas-time an' just be'ind the Rains;
Ho! get away you bullock-man, you've 'eard the bugle blowed,
There's a regiment a-comin' down the Grand Trunk Road;
    With its best foot first
    And the road a-sliding past,
    An' every bloomin' campin'-ground exactly like the last;
    While the Big Drum says,
    With 'is "rowdy-dowdy-dow!"--
    "Kiko kissywarsti don't you hamsher argy jow?" 2

Oh, there's them Injian temples to admire when you see,
There's the peacock round the corner an' the monkey up the tree,
An' there's that rummy silver grass a-wavin' in the wind,
An' the old Grand Trunk a-trailin' like a rifle-sling be'ind.

    While it's best foot first, . . .

At half-past five's Revelly, an' our tents they down must come,
Like a lot of button mushrooms when you pick 'em up at 'ome.
But it's over in a minute, an' at six the column starts,
While the women and the kiddies sit an' shiver in the carts.

    An' it's best foot first, . . .

Oh, then it's open order, an' we lights our pipes an' sings,
An' we talks about our rations an' a lot of other things,
An' we thinks o' friends in England, an' we wonders what they're at,
An' 'ow they would admire for to hear us sling the bat.1

    An' it's best foot first, . . .

It's none so bad o' Sunday, when you're lyin' at your ease,
To watch the kites a-wheelin' round them feather-'eaded trees,
For although there ain't no women, yet there ain't no barrick-yards,
So the orficers goes shootin' an' the men they plays at cards.

    Till it's best foot first, . . .

So 'ark an' 'eed, you rookies, which is always grumblin' sore,
There's worser things than marchin' from Umballa to Cawnpore;
An' if your 'eels are blistered an' they feels to 'urt like 'ell,
You drop some tallow in your socks an' that will make 'em well.

    For it's best foot first, . . .

We're marchin' on relief over Injia's coral strand,
Eight 'undred fightin' Englishmen, the Colonel, and the Band;
Ho! get away you bullock-man, you've 'eard the bugle blowed,
There's a regiment a-comin' down the Grand Trunk Road;
    With its best foot first
    And the road a-sliding past,
    An' every bloomin' campin'-ground exactly like the last;
    While the Big Drum says,
    With 'is "rowdy-dowdy-dow!"--
    "Kiko kissywarsti don't you hamsher argy jow?"2

1 Thomas's first and firmest conviction is that he is a profound Orientalist
and a fluent speaker of Hindustani.  As a matter of fact, he depends largely
on the sign-language.
2 Why don't you get on

The end

*    *    *    *    *    *



VOLUME III THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW AND OTHER
GHOST STORIES


THE PHANTOM 'RICKSHAW

May no ill dreams disturb my rest,
Nor Powers of Darkness me molest.
        --Evening Hymn.

ONE of the few advantages that India has over England is a great Knowability.
After five years' service a man is directly or indirectly acquainted with the
two or three hundred Civilians in his Province, all the Messes of ten or
twelve Regiments and Batteries, and some fifteen hundred other people of the
non-official caste. In ten years his knowledge should be doubled, and at the
end of twenty he knows, or knows something about, every Englishman in the
Empire, and may travel anywhere and everywhere without paying hotel-bills.

Globe-trotters who expect entertainment as a right, have, even within my
memory, blunted this open-heartedness, but none the less today, if you belong
to the Inner Circle and are neither a Bear nor a Black Sheep, all houses are
open to you, and our small world is very, very kind and helpful.

Rickett of Kamartha stayed with Polder of Kumaon some fifteen years ago. He
meant to stay two nights, but was knocked down by rheumatic fever, and for six
weeks disorganized Polder's establishment, stopped Polder's work, and nearly
died in Polder's bedroom. Polder behaves as though he had been placed under
eternal obligation by Rickett, and yearly sends the little Ricketts a box of
presents and toys. It is the same everywhere. The men who do not take the
trouble to conceal from you their opinion that you are an incompetent ass, and
the women who blacken your character and misunderstand your wife's amusements,
will work themselves to the bone in your behalf if you fall sick or into
serious trouble.

Heatherlegh, the Doctor, kept, in addition to his regular practice, a hospital
on his private account--an arrangement of loose boxes for Incurables, his
friend called it--but it was really a sort of fitting-up shed for craft that
had been damaged by stress of weather. The weather in India is often sultry,
and since the tale of bricks is always a fixed quantity, and the only liberty
allowed is permission to work overtime and get no thanks, men occasionally
break down and become as mixed as the metaphors in this sentence.

Heatherlegh is the dearest doctor that ever was, and his invariable
prescription to all his patients is, "lie low, go slow, and keep cool." He
says that more men are killed by overwork than the importance of this world
justifies. He maintains that overwork slew Pansay, who died under his hands
about three years ago. He has, of course, the right to speak authoritatively,
and he laughs at my theory that there was a crack in Pansay's head and a
little bit of the Dark World came through and pressed him to death. "Pansay
went off the handle," says Heatherlegh, "after the stimulus of long leave at
Home. He may or he may not have behaved like a blackguard to Mrs. Keith-
Wessington. My notion is that the work of the Katabundi Settlement ran him off
his legs, and that he took to brooding and making much of an ordinary P. & 0.
flirtation. He certainly was engaged to Miss Mannering, and she certainly
broke off the engagement. Then he took a feverish chill and all that nonsense
about ghosts developed. Overwork started his illness, kept it alight, and
killed him poor devil. Write him off to the System--one man to take the work
of two and a half men."

I do not believe this. I used to sit up with Pansay sometimes when Heatherlegh
was called out to patients, and I happened to be within claim. The man would
make me most unhappy by describing in a low, even voice, the procession that
was always passing at the bottom of his bed. He had a sick man's command of
language.

When he recovered I suggested that he should write out the whole affair from
beginning to end, knowing that ink might assist him to ease his mind. When
little boys have learned a new bad word they are never happy till they have
chalked it up on a door. And this also is Literature.

He was in a high fever while he was writing, and the blood-and-thunder
Magazine diction he adopted did not calm him. Two months afterward he was
reported fit for duty, but, in spite of the fact that he was urgently needed
to help an undermanned Commission stagger through a deficit, he preferred to
die; vowing at the last that he was hag-ridden. I got his manuscript before he
died, and this is his version of the affair, dated 1885:

My doctor tells me that I need rest and change of air. It is not improbable
that I shall get both ere long--rest that neither the red-coated messenger nor
the midday gun can break, and change of air far beyond that which any
homeward-bound steamer can give me. In the meantime I am resolved to stay
where I am; and, in flat defiance of my doctor's orders, to take all the world
into my confidence. You shall learn for yourselves the precise nature of my
malady; and shall, too, judge for yourselves whether any man born of woman on
this weary earth was ever so tormented as I.

Speaking now as a condemned criminal might speak ere the drop-bolts are drawn,
my story, wild and hideously improbable as it may appear, demands at least
attention. That it will ever receive credence I utterly disbelieve. Two months
ago I should have scouted as mad or drunk the man who had dared tell me the
like. Two months ago I was the happiest man in India. Today, from Peshawur to
the sea, there is no one more wretched. My doctor and I are the only two who
know this. His explanation is, that my brain, digestion, and eyesight are all
slightly affected; giving rise to my frequent and persistent "delusions."
Delusions, indeed! I call him a fool; but he attends me still with the same
unwearied smile, the same bland professional manner, the same neatly trimmed
red whiskers, till I begin to suspect that I am an ungrateful, evil-tempered
invalid. But you shall judge for yourselves.

Three years ago it was my fortune--my great misfortune--to sail from Gravesend
to Bombay, on return from long leave, with one Agnes Keith-Wessington, wife of
an officer on the Bombay side. It does not in the least concern you to know
what manner of woman she was. Be content with the knowledge that, ere the
voyage had ended, both she and I were desperately and unreasoningly in love
with one another. Heaven knows that I can make the admission now without one
particle of vanity. In matters of this sort there is always one who gives and
another who accepts. From the first day of our ill-omened attachment, I was
conscious that Agnes's passion was a stronger, a more dominant, and--if I may
use the expression--a purer sentiment than mine. Whether she recognized the
fact then, I do not know. Afterward it was bitterly plain to both of us.

Arrived at Bombay in the spring of the year, we went our respective ways, to
meet no more for the next three or four months, when my leave and her love
took us both to Simla. There we spent the season together; and there my fire
of straw burned itself out to a pitiful end with the closing year. I attempt
no excuse. I make no apology. Mrs. Wessington had given up much for my sake,
and was prepared to give up all. From my own lips, in August, 1882, she
learned that I was sick of her presence, tired of her company, and weary of
the sound of her voice. Ninety-nine women out of a hundred would have wearied
of me as I wearied of them; seventy-five of that number would have promptly
avenged themselves by active and obtrusive flirtation with other men. Mrs.
Wessington was the hundredth. On her neither my openly expressed aversion nor
the cutting brutalities with which I garnished our interviews had the least
effect. "Jack, darling!" was her one eternal cuckoo cry: "I'm sure it's all a
mistake--a hideous mistake; and we'll be good friends again some day. Please
forgive me, Jack, dear."

I was the offender, and I knew it. That knowledge transformed my pity into
passive endurance, and, eventually, into blind hate--the same instinct, I
suppose, which prompts a man to savagely stamp on the spider he has but half
killed. And with this hate in my bosom the season of 1882 came to an end.

Next year we met again at Simla--she with her monotonous face and timid
attempts at reconciliation, and I with loathing of her in every fibre of my
frame. Several times I could not avoid meeting her alone; and on each occasion
her words were identically the same. Still the unreasoning wail that it was
all a "mistake"; and still the hope of eventually "making friends." I might
have seen had I cared to look, that that hope only was keeping her alive. She
grew more wan and thin month by month. You will agree with me, at least, that
such conduct would have driven any one to despair. It was uncalled for;
childish; unwomanly. I maintain that she was much to blame. And again,
sometimes, in the black, fever-stricken night-watches, I have begun to think
that I might have been a little kinder to her. But that really is a
"delusion." I could not have continued pretending to love her when I didn't;
could I? It would have been unfair to us both.

Last year we met again--on the same terms as before. The same weary appeal,
and the same curt answers from my lips. At least I would make her see how
wholly wrong and hopeless were her attempts at resuming the old relationship.
As the season wore on, we fell apart--that is to say, she found it difficult
to meet me, for I had other and more absorbing interests to attend to. When I
think it over quietly in my sick-room, the season of 1884 seems a confused
nightmare wherein light and shade were fantastically intermingled--my
courtship of little Kitty Mannering; my hopes, doubts, and fears; our long
rides together; my trembling avowal of attachment; her reply; and now and
again a vision of a white face flitting by in the 'rickshaw with the black and
white liveries I once watched for so earnestly; the wave of Mrs. Wessington's
gloved hand; and, when she met me alone, which was but seldom, the irksome
monotony of her appeal. I loved Kitty Mannering; honestly, heartily loved her,
and with my love for her grew my hatred for Agnes. In August Kitty and I were
engaged. The next day I met those accursed "magpie" jhampanies at the back of
Jakko, and, moved by some passing sentiment of pity, stopped to tell Mrs.
Wessington everything. She knew it already.

"So I hear you're engaged, Jack dear." Then, without a moment's pause--"I'm
sure it's all a mistake--a hideous mistake. We shall be as good friends some
day, Jack, as we ever were."

My answer might have made even a man wince. It cut the dying woman before me
like the blow of a whip. "Please forgive me, Jack; I didn't mean to make you
angry; but it's true, it's true!"

And Mrs. Wessington broke down completely. I turned away and left her to
finish her journey in peace, feeling, but only for a moment or two, that I had
been an unutterably mean hound. I looked back, and saw that she had turned her
'rickshaw with the idea, I suppose, of overtaking me.

The scene and its surroundings were photographed on my memory.

The rain-swept sky (we were at the end of the wet weather), the sodden, dingy
pines, the muddy road, and the black powder-riven cliffs formed a gloomy
background against which the black and white liveries of the jhampanies, the
yellow-paneled 'rickshaw and Mrs. Wessington's down-bowed golden head stood
out clearly. She was holding her handkerchief in her left hand and was leaning
hack exhausted against the 'rickshaw cushions. I turned my horse up a bypath
near the Sanjowlie Reservoir and literally ran away. Once I fancied I heard a
faint call of "Jack!" This may have been imagination. I never stopped to
verify it. Ten minutes later I came across Kitty on horseback; and, in the
delight of a long ride with her, forgot all about the interview.

A week later Mrs. Wessington died, and the inexpressible burden of her
existence was removed from my life. I went Plainsward perfectly happy. Before
three months were over I had forgotten all about her, except that at times the
discovery of some of her old letters reminded me unpleasantly of our bygone
relationship. By January I had disinterred what was left of our correspondence
from among my scattered belongings and had burned it. At the beginning of
April of this year, 1885, I was at Simla--semi-deserted Simla--once more, and
was deep in lover's talks and walks with Kitty. It was decided that we should
be married at the end of June. You will understand, therefore, that, loving
Kitty as I did, I am not saying too much when I pronounce myself to have been,
at that time, the happiest man in India.

Fourteen delightful days passed almost before I noticed their flight.

Then, aroused to the sense of what was proper among mortals circumstanced as
we were, I pointed out to Kitty that an engagement ring was the outward and
visible sign of her dignity as an engaged girl; and that she must forthwith
come to Hamilton's to be measured for one. Up to that moment, I give you my
word, we had completely forgotten so trivial a matter. To Hamilton's we
accordingly went on the 15th of April, 1885. Remember that--whatever my doctor
may say to the contrary--I was then in perfect health, enjoying a well-
balanced mind and an absolute tranquil spirit. Kitty and I entered Hamilton's
shop together, and there, regardless of the order of affairs, I measured Kitty
for the ring in the presence of the amused assistant. The ring was a sapphire
with two diamonds. We then rode out down the slope that leads to the
Combermere Bridge and Peliti's shop.

 While my Waler was cautiously feeling his way over the loose shale, and Kitty
was laughing and chattering at my side--while all Simla, that is to say as
much of it as had then come from the Plains, was grouped round the Reading-
room and Peliti's veranda,--I was aware that some one, apparently at a vast
distance, was calling me by my Christian name. It struck me that I had heard
the voice before, but when and where I could not at once determine. In the
short space it took to cover the road between the path from Hamilton's shop
and the first plank of the Combermere Bridge I had thought over half a dozen
people who might have committed such a solecism, and had eventually decided
that it must have been singing in my ears. Immediately opposite Peliti's shop
my eye was arrested by the sight of four jharnpanies in "magpie" livery,
pulling a yellow-paneled, cheap, bazar 'rickshaw. In a moment my mind flew
back to the previous season and Mrs. Wessington with a sense of irritation and
disgust. Was it not enough that the woman was dead and done with, without her
black and white servitors reappearing to spoil the day's happiness? Whoever
employed them now I thought I would call upon, and ask as a personal favor to
change her jhampanies' livery. I would hire the men myself, and, if necessary,
buy their coats from off their backs. It is impossible to say here what a
flood of undesirable memories their presence evoked.

"Kitty," I cried, "there are poor Mrs. Wessington's jhampanies turned up
again! I wonder who has them now?"

Kitty had known Mrs. Wessington slightly last season, and had always been
interested in the sickly woman.
 "What? Where?" she asked. "I can't see them anywhere."

Even as she spoke her horse, swerving from a laden mule, threw himself
directly in front of the advancing 'rickshaw. I had scarcely time to utter a
word of warning when, to my unutterable horror, horse and rider passed through
men and carriage as if they had been thin air.                   

"What's the matter?" cried Kitty; "what made you call out so foolishly, Jack?
If I am engaged I don't want all creation to know about it. There was lots of
space between the mule and the veranda; and, if you think I can't ride--

"--There!"

Whereupon wilful Kitty set off, her dainty little head in the air, at a hand-
gallop in the direction of the Bandstand; fully expecting, as she herself
afterward told me, that I should follow her. What was the matter? Nothing
indeed. Either that I was mad or drunk, or that Simla was haunted with devils.
I reined in my impatient cob, and turned round. The 'rickshaw had turned too,
and now stood immediately facing me, near the left railing of the Combermere
Bridge.

"Jack! Jack, darling!" (There was no mistake about the words this time: they
rang through my brain as if they had been shouted in my ear.) "It's some
hideous mistake, I'm sure. Please forgive me, jack, and let's be friends
again."

The 'rickshaw-hood had fallen back, and inside, as I hope and pray daily for
the death I dread by night, sat Mrs. Keith-Wessington, handkerchief in hand,
and golden head bowed on her breast.

How long I stared motionless I do not know. Finally, I was aroused by my syce
taking the Waler's bridle and asking whether I was ill. From the horrible to
the commonplace is but a step. I tumbled off my horse and dashed, half
fainting, into Peliti's for a glass of cherry-brandy. There two or three
couples were gathered round the coffee-tables discussing the gossip of the
day. Their trivialities were more comforting to me just then than the
consolations of religion could have been. I plunged into the midst of the
conversation at once; chatted, laughed, and jested with a face (when I caught
a glimpse of it in a mirror) as white and drawn as that of a corpse. Three or
four mem noticed my condition; and, evidently setting it down to the results
of over-many pegs, charitably endeavoured to draw me apart from the rest of
the loungers. But I refused to be led away. I wanted the company of my kind--
as a child rushes into the midst of the dinner-party after a fright in the
dark. I must have talked for about ten minutes or so, though it seemed an
eternity to me, when I heard Kitty's clear voice outside inquiring for me. In
another minute she had entered the shop, prepared to roundly upbraid me for
failing so signally in my duties. Something in my face stopped her.

"Why, Jack," she cried, "what have you been doing? What has happened? Are you
ill?" Thus driven into a direct lie, I said that the sun had been a little too
much for me. It was close upon five o'clock of a cloudy April afternoon, and
the sun had been hidden all day. I saw my mistake as soon as the words were
out of my mouth: attempted to recover it; blundered hopelessly and followed
Kitty in a regal rage, out of doors, amid the smiles of my acquaintances. I
made some excuse (I have forgotten what) on the score of my feeling faint; and
cantered away to my hotel, leaving Kitty to finish the ride by herself.

In my room I sat down and tried calmly to reason out the matter.

Here was I, Theobald Jack Pansay, a well-educated Bengal Civilian in the year
of grace, 1885, presumably sane, certainly healthy, driven in terror from my
sweetheart's side by the apparition of a woman who had been dead and buried
eight months ago. These were facts that I could not blink. Nothing was further
from my thought than any memory of Mrs. Wessington when Kitty and I left
Hamilton's shop. Nothing was more utterly commonplace than the stretch of wall
opposite Peliti's. It was broad daylight. The road was full of people; and yet
here, look you, in defiance of every law of probability, in direct outrage of
Nature's ordinance, there had appeared to me a face from the grave.

Kitty's Arab had gone through the 'rickshaw: so that my first hope that some
woman marvelously like Mrs. Wessington had hired the carriage and the coolies
with their old livery was lost. Again and again I went round this treadmill of
thought; and again and again gave up baffled and in despair. The voice was as
inexplicable as the apparition. I had originally some wild notion of confiding
it all to Kitty; of begging her to marry me at once; and in her arms defying
the ghostly occupant of the 'rickshaw. "After all," I argued, "the presence of
the 'rickshaw is in itself enough to prove the existence of a spectral
illusion. One may see ghosts of men and women, but surely never of coolies and
carriages. The whole thing is absurd. Fancy the ghost of a hill-man!"

Next morning I sent a penitent note to Kitty, imploring her to overlook my
strange conduct of the previous afternoon. My Divinity was still very wroth,
and a personal apology was necessary. I explained, with a fluency born of
night-long pondering over a falsehood, that I had been attacked with sudden
palpitation of the heart--the result of indigestion. This eminently practical
solution had its effect; and Kitty and I rode out that afternoon with the
shadow of my first lie dividing us.

Nothing would please her save a canter round Jakko. With my nerves still
unstrung from the previous night I feebly protested against the notion,
suggesting Observatory Hill, Jutogh, the Boileaugunge road--anything rather
than the Jakko round. Kitty was angry and a little hurt: so I yielded from
fear of provoking further misunderstanding, and we set out together toward
Chota Simla. We walked a greater part of the way, and, according to our
custom, cantered from a mile or so below the Convent to the stretch of level
road by the Sanjowlie Reservoir. The wretched horses appeared to fly, and my
heart beat quicker and quicker as we neared the crest of the ascent. My mind
had been full of Mrs. Wessington all the afternoon; and every inch of the
Jakko road bore witness to our oldtime walks and talks. The bowlders were full
of it; the pines sang it aloud overhead; the rain-fed torrents giggled and
chuckled unseen over the shameful story; and the wind in my ears chanted the
iniquity aloud.

As a fitting climax, in the middle of the level men call the Ladies' Mile the
Horror was awaiting me. No other 'rickshaw was in sight--only the four black
and white jhampanies, the yellow-paneled carriage, and the golden head of the
woman within--all apparently just as I had left them eight months and one
fortnight ago! For an instant I fancied that Kitty must see what I saw--we
were so marvelously sympathetic in all things. Her next words undeceived me--
"Not a soul in sight! Come along, Jack, and I'll race you to the Reservoir
buildings!" Her wiry little Arab was off like a bird, my Waler following close
behind, and in this order we dashed under the cliffs. Half a minute brought us
within fifty yards of the 'rickshaw. I pulled my Waler and fell back a little.
The 'rickshaw was directly in the middle of the road; and once more the Arab
passed through it, my horse following. "Jack! Jack dear! Please forgive me,"
rang with a wail in my ears, and, after an interval:--"It's a mistake, a
hideous mistake!"

I spurred my horse like a man possessed. When I turned my head at the
Reservoir works, the black and white liveries were still waiting--patiently
waiting--under the grey hillside, and the wind brought me a mocking echo of
the words I had just heard. Kitty bantered me a good deal on my silence
throughout the remainder of the ride. I had been talking up till then wildly
and at random.

To save my life I could not speak afterward naturally, and from Sanjowlie to
the Church wisely held my tongue.

I was to dine with the Mannerings that night, and had barely time to canter
home to dress. On the road to Elysium Hill I overheard two men talking
together in the dusk.--"It's a curious thing," said one, "how completely all
trace of it disappeared. You know my wife was insanely fond of the woman
('never could see anything in her myself), and wanted me to pick up her old
'rickshaw and coolies if they were to be got for love or money. Morbid sort of
fancy I call it; but I've got to do what the Memsahib tells me.

"Would you believe that the man she hired it from tells me that all four of
the men--they were brothers--died of cholera on the way to Hardwar, poor
devils, and the 'rickshaw has been broken up by the man himself. 'Told me he
never used a dead Memsahib's 'rickshaw. 'Spoiled his luck.' Queer notion,
wasn't it? Fancy poor little Mrs. Wessington spoiling any one's luck except
her own!" I laughed aloud at this point; and my laugh jarred on me as I
uttered it. So there were ghosts of 'rickshaws after all, and ghostly
employments in the other world! How much did Mrs. Wessington give her men?
What were their hours? Where did they go?

And for visible answer to my last question I saw the infernal Thing blocking
my path in the twilight. The dead travel fast, and by short cuts unknown to
ordinary coolies. I laughed aloud a second time and checked my laughter
suddenly, for I was afraid I was going mad. Mad to a certain extent I must
have been, for I recollect that I reined in my horse at the head of the
'rickshaw, and politely wished Mrs. Wessington "Good evening." Her answer was
one I knew only too well. I listened to the end; and replied that I had heard
it all before, but should be delighted if she had anything further to say.
Some malignant devil stronger than I must have entered into me that evening,
for I have a dim recollection of talking the commonplaces of the day for five
minutes to the Thing in front of me.

"Mad as a hatter, poor devil--or drunk. Max, try and get him to come home."

Surely that was not Mrs. Wessington's voice! The two men had overheard me
speaking to the empty air, and had returned to look after me. They were very
kind and considerate, and from their words evidently gathered that I was
extremely drunk. I thanked them confusedly and cantered away to my hotel,
there changed, and arrived at the Mannerings' ten minutes late. I pleaded the
darkness of the night as an excuse; was rebuked by Kitty for my unlover-like
tardiness; and sat down.

The conversation had already become general; and under cover of it, I was
addressing some tender small talk to my sweetheart when I was aware that at
the further end of the table a short red-whiskered man was describing, with
much broidery, his encounter with a mad unknown that evening.

A few sentences convinced me that he was repeating the incident of half an
hour ago. In the middle of the story he looked round for applause, as
professional story-tellers do, caught my eye, and straightway collapsed. There
was a moment's awkward silence, and the red-whiskered man muttered something
to the effect that he had "forgotten the rest," thereby sacrificing a
reputation as a good story~teller which he had built up for six seasons past.
I blessed him from the bottom of my heart, and--went on with my fish.

In the fulness of time that dinner came to an end; and with genuine regret I
tore myself away from Kitty--as certain as I was of my own existence that It
would be waiting for me outside the door. The red-whiskered man, who had been
introduced to me as Doctor Heatherlegh, of Simla, volunteered to bear me
company as far as our roads lay together. I accepted his offer with gratitude.

My instinct had not deceived me. It lay in readiness in the Mall, and, in what
seemed devilish mockery of our ways, with a lighted head-lamp. The red-
whiskered man went to the point at once, in a manner that showed he bad been
thinking over it all dinner time.

"I say, Pansay, what the deuce was the matter with you this evening on the
Elysium road?" The suddenness of the question wrenched an answer from me
before I was aware.

"That!" said I, pointing to It.

"That may be either D. T. or Eyes for aught I know. Now you don't liquor. I
saw as much at dinner, so it can't be D. T. There's nothing whatever where
you're pointing, though you're sweating and trembling with fright like a
scared pony. Therefore, I conclude that it's Eyes. And I ought to understand
all about them. Come along home with me. I'm on the Blessington lower road."

To my intense delight the 'rickshaw instead of waiting for us kept about
twenty yards ahead--and this, too whether we walked, trotted, or cantered. In
the course of that long night ride I had told my companion almost as much as I
have told you here.

"Well, you've spoiled one of the best tales I've ever laid tongue to," said
he, "but I'll forgive you for the sake of what you've gone through. Now come
home and do what I tell you; and when I've cured you, young man, let this be a
lesson to you to steer clear of women and indigestible food till the day of
your death."

The 'rickshaw kept steady in front; and my red-whiskered friend seemed to
derive great pleasure from my account of its exact whereabouts.

"Eyes, Pansay--all Eyes, Brain, and Stomach. And the greatest of these three
is Stomach. You've too much conceited Brain, too little Stomach, and
thoroughly unhealthy Eyes. Get your Stomach straight and the rest follows. And
all that's French for a liver pill.

"I'll take sole medical charge of you from this hour! for you're too
interesting a phenomenon to be passed over."

By this time we were deep in the shadow of the Blessington lower road and the
'rickshaw came to a dead stop under a pine-clad, over-hanging shale cliff.
Instinctively I halted too, giving my reason. Heatherlegh rapped out an oath.

"Now, if you think I'm going to spend a cold night on the hillside for the
sake of a stomach-cum-Brain-cum-Eye illusion--Lord, ha' mercy! What's that?"

There was a muffled report, a blinding smother of dust just in front of us, a
crack, the noise of rent boughs, and about ten yards of the cliff-side--pines,
undergrowth, and all--slid down into the road below, completely blocking it
up. The uprooted trees swayed and tottered for a moment like drunken giants in
the gloom, and then fell prone among their fellows with a thunderous crash.
Our two horses stood motionless and sweating with fear. As soon as the rattle
of falling earth and stone had subsided, my companion muttered:--"Man, if we'd
gone forward we should have been ten feet deep in our graves by now. 'There
are more things in heaven and earth...' Come home, Pansay, and thank God. I
want a peg badly."

We retraced our way over the Church Ridge, and I arrived at Dr. Heatherlegh's
house shortly after midnight.

His attempts toward my cure commenced almost immediately, and for a week I
never left his sight. Many a time in the course of that week did I bless the
good fortune which had thrown me in contact with Simla's best and kindest
doctor. Day by day my spirits grew lighter and more equable. Day by day, too,
I became more and more inclined to fall in with Heatherlegh's "spectral
illusion" theory, implicating eyes, brain, and stomach. I wrote to Kitty,
telling her that a slight sprain caused by a fall from my horse kept me
indoors for a few days; and that I should be recovered before she had time to
regret my absence.

Heatherlegh's treatment was simple to a degree. It consisted of liver pills,
cold-water baths, and strong exercise, taken in the dusk or at early dawn--
for, as he sagely observed:--"A man with a sprained ankle doesn't walk a dozen
miles a day, and your young woman might be wondering if she saw you."

At the end of the week, after much examination of pupil and pulse, and strict
injunction' as to diet and pedestrianism, Heatherlegh dismissed me as
brusquely as he had taken charge of me. Here is his parting benediction:--
"Man, I can certify to your mental cure, and that's as much as to say I've
cured most of your bodily ailments. Now, get your traps out of this as soon as
you can; and be off to make love to Miss Kitty."

I was endeavoring to express my thanks for his kindness. He cut me short.

"Don't think I did this because I like you. I gather that you've behaved like
a blackguard all through. But, all the same, you re a phenomenon, and as queer
a phenomenon as you are a blackguard. No!"--checking me a second time--"not a
rupee please. Go out and see if you can find the eyes-brain-and-stomach
business again. I'll give you a lakh for each time you see it."

Half an hour later I was in the Mannerings' drawing-room with Kitty--drunk
with the intoxication of present happiness and the fore-knowledge that I
should never more be troubled with Its hideous presence. Strong in the sense
of my new-found security, I proposed a ride at once; and, by preference, a
canter round Jakko.

Never had I felt so well, so overladen with vitality and mere animal spirits,
as I did on the afternoon of the 30th of April. Kitty was delighted at the
change in my appearance, and complimented me on it in her delightfully frank
and outspoken manner. We left the Mannerings' house together, laughing and
talking, and cantered along the Chota Simla road as of old.

I was in haste to reach the Sanjowlie Reservoir and there make my assurance
doubly sure. The horses did their best, but seemed all too slow to my
impatient mind. Kitty was astonished at my boisterousness. "Why, Jack!" she
cried at last, "you are behaving like a child. What are you doing?"

We were just below the Convent, and from sheer wantonness I was making my
Waler plunge and curvet across the road as I tickled it with the loop of my
riding-whip.

"Doing?" I answered; "nothing, dear. That's just it. If you'd been doing
nothing for a week except lie up, you'd be as riotous as I."

"'Singing and murmuring in your feastful mirth, Joying to feel yourself alive;
Lord over Nature, Lord of the visible Earth, Lord of the senses five.'"

My quotation was hardly out of my lips before we had rounded the corner above
the Convent; and a few yards further on could see across to Sanjowlie. In the
centre of the level road stood the black and white liveries, the yellow-
paneled 'rickshaw, and Mrs. Keith-Wessington. I pulled up, looked, rubbed my
eyes, and, I believe must have said something. The next thing I knew was that
I was lying face downward on the road with Kitty kneeling above me in tears.

"Has it gone, child ?" I gasped. Kitty only wept more bitterly.

"Has what gone, Jack dear? what does it all mean? There must be a mistake
somewhere, Jack. A hideous mistake." Her last words brought me to my feet--
mad--raving for the time being.

"Yes, there is a mistake somewhere," I repeated, "a hideous mistake. Come and
look at It."

I have an indistinct idea that I dragged Kitty by the wrist along the road up
to where It stood, and implored her for pity's sake to speak to It; to tell It
that we were betrothed; that neither Death nor Hell could break the tie
between us; and Kitty only knows how much more to the same effect. Now and
again I appealed passionately to the Terror in the 'rickshaw to bear witness
to all I had said, and to release me from a torture that was killing me. As I
talked I suppose I must have told Kitty of my old relations with Mrs.
Wessington, for I saw her listen intently with white face and blazing eyes.

"Thank you, Mr. Pansay," she said, "that's quite enough. Syce ghora lao."

The syces, impassive as Orientals always are, had come up with the recaptured
horses; and as Kitty sprang into her saddle I caught hold of the bridle,
entreating her to hear me out and forgive. My answer was the cut of her
riding-whip across my face from mouth to eye, and a word or two of farewell
that even now I cannot write down. So I judged, and judged rightly, that Kitty
knew all; and I staggered back to the side of the 'rickshaw. My face was cut
and bleeding, and the blow of the riding-whip had raised a livid blue wheal on
it. I had no self-respect. Just then, Heatherlegh, who must have been
following Kitty and me at a distance, cantered up.

"Doctor," I said, pointing to my face, "here's Miss Mannering's signature to
my order of dismissal and--I'll thank you for that lakh as soon as
convenient."

Heatherlegh's face, even in my abject misery, moved me to laughter.

"I'll stake my professional reputation"--he began.

"Don't be a fool," I whispered. "I've lost my life's happiness and you'd
better take me home."

As I spoke the 'rickshaw was gone. Then I lost all knowledge of what was
passing. The crest of Jakko seemed to heave and roll like the crest of a cloud
and fall in upon me.

Seven days later (on the 7th of May, that is to say) I was aware that I was
lying in Heatherlegh's room as weak as a little child. Heatherlegh was
watching me intently from behind the papers on his writing-table. His first
words were not encouraging; but I was too far spent to be much moved by them.

"Here's Miss Kitty has sent back your letters. You corresponded a good deal,
you young people. Here's a packet that looks like a ring, and a cheerful sort
of a note from Mannering Papa, which I've taken the liberty of reading and
burning. The old gentleman's not pleased with you."

"And Kitty?" I asked, dully.

"Rather more drawn than her father from what she says. By the same token you
must have been letting out any number of queer reminiscences just before I met
you. 'Says that a man who would have behaved to a woman as you did to Mrs.
Wessington ought to kill himself out of sheer pity for his kind. She's a hot-
headed little virago, your mash. 'Will have it too that you were suffering
from D. T. when that row on the Jakko road turned up. 'Says she'll die before
she ever speaks to you again."

I groaned and turned over to the other side.

"Now you've got your choice, my friend. This engagement has to be broken off;
and the Mannerings don't want to be too hard on you. Was it broken through D.
T. or epileptic fits? Sorry I can't offer you a better exchange unless you'd
prefer hereditary insanity. Say the word and I'll tell 'em it's fits. All
Simla knows about that scene on the Ladies' Mile. Come! I'll give you five
minutes to think over it."

During those five minutes I believe that I explored thoroughly the lowest
circles of the Inferno which it is permitted man to tread on earth. And at the
same time I myself was watching myself faltering through the dark labyrinths
of doubt, misery, and utter despair. I wondered, as Heatherlegh in his chair
might have wondered, which dreadful alternative I should adopt. Presently I
heard myself answering in a voice that I hardly recognized, "--They're
confoundedly particular about morality in these parts. Give 'em fits,
Heatherlegh, and my love. Now let me sleep a bit longer."

Then my two selves joined, and it was only I (half crazed, devil-driven I)
that tossed in my bed, tracing step by step the history of the past month.

"But I am in Simla," I kept repeating to myself. "I, Jack Pansay, am in Simla
and there are no ghosts here. It's unreasonable of that woman to pretend there
are. Why couldn't Agnes have left me alone? I never did her any harm. It might
just as well have been me as Agnes. Only I'd never have come hack on purpose
to kill her. Why can't I be left alone--left alone and happy?"

It was high noon when I first awoke, and the sun was low in the sky before I
slept--slept as the tortured criminal sleeps on his rack, too worn to feel
further pain.

Next day I could not leave my bed. Heatherlegh told me in the morning that he
had received an answer from Mr. Mannering, and that, thanks to his
(Heatherlegh's) friendly offices, the story of my affliction had traveled
through the length and breadth of Simla, where I was on all sides much pitied.

"And that's rather more than you deserve," he concluded, pleasantly, "though
the Lord knows you've been going through a pretty severe mill. Never mind;
we'll cure you yet, you perverse phenomenon."

I declined firmly to be cured. "You've been much too good to me already, old
man," said I; "but I don't think I need trouble you further."

In my heart I knew that nothing Heatherlegh could do would lighten the burden
that had been laid upon me.

With that knowledge came also a sense of hopeless, impotent rebellion against
the unreasonableness of it all. There were scores of men no better than I
whose punishments had at least been reserved for another world; and I felt
that it was bitterly, cruelly unfair that I alone should have been singled out
for so hideous a fate. This mood would in time give place to another where it
seemed that the 'rickshaw and I were the only realities in a world of shadows;
that Kitty was a ghost; that Mannering, Heatherlegh, and all the other men and
women I knew were all ghosts; and the great, grey hills themselves but vain
shadows devised to torture me. From mood to mood I tossed backward and forward
for seven weary days; my body growing daily stronger and stronger, until the
bedroom looking-glass told me that I had returned to everyday life, and was as
other men once more. Curiously enough my face showed no signs of the struggle
I had gone through. It was pale indeed, but as expressionless and commonplace
as ever. I had expected some permanent alteration--visible evidence of the
disease that was eating me away. I found nothing.

On the 15th of May, I left Heatherlegh's house at eleven o'clock in the
morning; and the instinct of the bachelor drove me to the Club. There I found
that every man knew my story as told by Heatherlegh, and was, in clumsy
fashion, abnormally kind and attentive. Nevertheless I recognized that for the
rest of my natural life I should be among but not of my fellows; and I envied
very bitterly indeed the laughing coolies on the Mall below. I lunched at the
Club, and at four o'clock wandered aimlessly down the Mall in the vague hope
of meeting Kitty. Close to the Band-stand the black and white liveries joined
me; and I heard Mrs. Wessington's old appeal at my side. I had been expecting
this ever since I came out; and was only surprised at her delay. The phantom
'rickshaw and I went side by side along the Chota Simla road in silence. Close
to the bazar, Kitty and a man on horseback overtook and passed us. For any
sign she gave I might have been a dog in the road. She did not even pay me the
compliment of quickening her pace; though the rainy afternoon had served for
an excuse.

So Kitty and her companion, and I and my ghostly Light-o'-Love, crept round
Jakko in couples. The road was streaming with water; the pines dripped like
roof-pipes on the rocks below, and the air was full of fine, driving rain. Two
or three times I found myself saying to myself almost aloud:"I'm Jack Pansay
on leave at Simla--at Simla! Everyday, ordinary Simla. I mustn't forget that--
I mustn't forget that." Then I would try to recollect some of the gossip I had
heard at the Club: the prices of So-and-So's horses--anything, in fact, that
related to the workaday Anglo-Indian world I knew so well. I even repeated the
multiplication-table rapidly to myself, to make quite sure that I was not
taking leave of my senses. It gave me much comfort; and must have prevented my
hearing Mrs. Wessington for a time.

Once more I wearily climbed the Convent slope and entered the level road. Here
Kitty and the man started off at a canter, and I was left alone with Mrs.
Wessington. "Agnes," said I, "will you put back your hood and tell me what it
all means?" The hood dropped noiselessly, and I was face to face with my dead
and buried mistress. She was wearing the dress in which I had last seen her
alive; carried the same tiny handkerchief in her right hand; and the same
cardcase in her left. (A woman eight months dead with a cardcase!) I had to
pin myself down to the multiplication-table, and to set both hands on the
stone parapet of the road, to assure myself that that at least was real.

"Agnes," I repeated, "for pity's sake tell me what it all means." Mrs.
Wessington leaned forward, with that odd, quick turn of the head I used to
know so well, and spoke.

If my story had not already so madly overleaped the hounds of all human belief
I should apologize to you now. As I know that no one--no, not even Kitty, for
whom it is written as some sort of justification of my conduct--will believe
me, I will go on. Mrs. Wessington spoke and I walked with her from the
Sanjowlie road to the turning below the Commander-in-Chief's house as I might
walk by the side of any living woman's 'rickshaw, deep in conversation. The
second and most tormenting of my moods of sickness had suddenly laid hold upon
me, and like the Prince in Tennyson's poem, "I seemed to move amid a world of
ghosts." There had been a garden-party at the Commander-in-Chief's, and we two
joined the crowd of homeward-bound folk. As I saw them then it seemed that
they were the shadows--impalpable,  fantastic shadows--that divided for Mrs.
Wessington's 'rickshaw to pass through. What we said during the course of that
weird interview I cannot--indeed, I dare not--tell. Heatherlegh's comment
would have been a short laugh and a remark that I had been "mashing a brain-
eye-and-stomach chimera." It was a ghastly and yet in some indefinable way a
marvelously dear experience. Could it be possible, I wondered, that I was in
this life to woo a second time the woman I had killed by my own neglect and
cruelty?

I met Kitty on the homeward road--a shadow among shadows.

If I were to describe all the incidents of the next fortnight in their order,
my story would never come to an end; and your patience would he exhausted.
Morning after morning and evening after evening the ghostly 'rickshaw and I
used to wander through Simla together. Wherever I went there the four black
and white liveries followed me and bore me company to and from my hotel. At
the Theatre I found them amid the crowd of yelling jhampanies; outside the
Club veranda, after a long evening of whist; at the Birthday Ball, waiting
patiently for my reappearance; and in broad daylight when I went calling. Save
that it cast no shadow, the 'rickshaw was in every respect as real to look
upon as one of wood and iron. More than once, indeed, I have had to check
myself from warning some hard-riding friend against cantering over it. More
than once I have walked down the Mall deep in conversation with Mrs.
Wessington to the unspeakable amazement of the passers-by.

Before I had been out and about a week I learned that the "fit" theory had
been discarded in favor of insanity. However, I made no change in my mode of
life. I called, rode, and dined out as freely as ever. I had a passion for the
society of my kind which I had never felt before; I hungered to be among the
realities of life; and at the same time I felt vaguely unhappy when I had been
separated too long from my ghostly companion. It would be almost impossible to
describe my varying moods from the 15th of May up to today.

The presence of the 'rickshaw filled me by turns with horror, blind fear, a
dim sort of pleasure, and utter despair. I dared not leave Simla; and I knew
that my stay there was killing me. I knew, moreover, that it was my destiny to
die slowly and a little every day. My only anxiety was to get the penance over
as quietly as might be. Alternately I hungered for a sight of Kitty and
watched her outrageous flirtations with my successor--to speak more
accurately, my successors--with amused interest. She was as much out of my
life as I was out of hers. By day I wandered with Mrs. Wessington almost
content. By night I implored Heaven to let me return to the world as I used to
know it. Above all these varying moods lay the sensation of dull, numbing
wonder that the Seen and the Unseen should mingle so strangely on this earth
to hound one poor soul to its grave.
 *  *  *  *  *  *   *   *   * 

August 27.--Heatherlegh has been indefatigable in his attendance on me; and
only yesterday told me that I ought to send in an application for sick leave.
An application to escape the company of a phantom! A request that the
Government would graciously permit me to get rid of five ghosts and an airy
'rickshaw by going to England. Heatherlegh's proposition moved me to almost
hysterical laughter. I told him that I should await the end quietly at Simla;
and I am sure that the end is not far off. Believe me that I dread its advent
more than any word can say; and I torture myself nightly with a thousand
speculations as to the manner of my death.

Shall I die in my bed decently and as an English gentleman should die; or, in
one last walk on the Mall, will my soul be wrenched from me to take its place
forever and ever by the side of that ghastly phantasm? Shall I return to my
old lost allegiance in the next world, or shall I meet Agnes loathing her and
bound to her side through all eternity? Shall we two hover over the scene of
our lives till the end of Time? As the day of my death draws nearer, the
intense horror that all living flesh feels toward escaped spirits from beyond
the grave grows more and more powerful. It is an awful thing to go down quick
among the dead with scarcely one-half of your life completed. It is a thousand
times more awful to wait as I do in your midst, for I know not what
unimaginable terror. Pity me, at least on the score of my "delusion," for I
know you will never believe what I have written here Yet as surely as ever a
man was done to death by the Powers of Darkness I am that man.

In justice, too, pity her. For as surely as ever woman was killed by man, I
killed Mrs. Wessington. And the last portion of my punishment is ever now upon
me.

*   *   *   *   *  *   *


MY OWN TRUE GHOST STORY

As I came through the Desert thus it was--As I came through the Desert.
           --The City of Dreadful Night.

Somewhere in the Other World, where there are books and pictures and plays and
shop windows to look at, and thousands of men who spend their lives in
building up all four, lives a gentleman who writes real stories about the real
insides of people; and his name is Mr. Walter Besant. But he will insist upon
treating his ghosts--he has published half a workshopful of them--with levity.
He makes his ghost-seers talk familiarly, and, in some cases, flirt
outrageously, with the phantoms. You may treat anything, from a Viceroy to a
Vernacular Paper, with levity; but you must behave reverently toward a ghost,
and particularly an Indian one.

There are, in this land, ghosts who take the form of fat, cold, pobby corpses,
and hide in trees near the roadside till a traveler passes. Then they drop
upon his neck and remain. There are also terrible ghosts of women who have
died in child-bed. These wander along the pathways at dusk, or hide in the
crops near a village, and call seductively. But to answer their call is death
in this world and the next. Their feet are turned backward that all sober men
may recognize them. There are ghosts of little children who have been thrown
into wells. These haunt well curbs and the fringes of jungles, and wail under
the stars, or catch women by the wrist and beg to be taken up and carried.
These and the corpse ghosts, however, are only vernacular articles and do not
attack Sahibs. No native ghost has yet been authentically reported to have
frightened an Englishman; but many English ghosts have scared the life out of
both white and black.

Nearly every other Station owns a ghost. There are said to be two at Simla,
not counting the woman who blows the bellows at Syree dak-bungalow on the Old
Road; Mussoorie has a house haunted of a very lively Thing; a White Lady is
supposed to do night-watchman round a house in Lahore; Dalhousie says that one
of her houses "repeats" on autumn evenings all the incidents of a horrible
horse-and-precipice accident; Murree has a merry ghost, and, now that she has
been swept by cholera, will have room for a sorrowful one; there are Officers'
Quarters in Mian Mir whose doors open without reason, and whose furniture is
guaranteed to creak, not with the heat of June but with the weight of
Invisibles who come to lounge in the chairs; Peshawur possesses houses that
none will willingly rent; and there is something--not fever--wrong with a big
bungalow in Allahabad. The older Provinces simply bristle with haunted houses,
and march phantom armies along their main thoroughfares.

Some of the dak-bungalows on the Grand Trunk Road have handy little cemeteries
in their compound--witnesses to the "changes and chances of this mortal life"
in the days when men drove from Calcutta to the Northwest. These bungalows are
objectionable places to put up in. They are generally very old, always dirty,
while the khansamah is as ancient as the bungalow. He either chatters
senilely, or falls into the long trances of age. In both moods he is useless.
If you get angry with him, he refers to some Sahib dead and buried these
thirty years, and says that when he was in that Sahib's service not a
khansamah in the Province could touch him. Then he jabbers and mows and
trembles and fidgets among the dishes, and you repent of your irritation.

In these dak-bungalows, ghosts are most likely to be found, and when found,
they should be made a note of. Not long ago it was my business to live in dak-
bungalows. I never inhabited the same house for three nights running, and grew
to be learned in the breed. I lived in Government-built ones with red brick
walls and rail ceilings, an inventory of the furniture posted in every room,
and an excited snake at the threshold to give welcome. I lived in "converted"
ones--old houses officiating as dak-bungalows--where nothing was in its proper
place and there wasn't even a fowl for dinner. I lived in second-hand palaces
where the wind blew through open-work marble tracery just as uncomfortably as
through a broken pane. I lived in dak-bungalows where the last entry in the
visitors' book was fifteen months old, and where they slashed off the curry-
kid's head with a sword. It was my good luck to meet all sorts of men, from
sober traveling missionaries and deserters flying from British Regiments, to
drunken loafers who threw whisky bottles at all who passed; and my still
greater good fortune just to escape a maternity case. Seeing that a fair
proportion of the tragedy of our lives out here acted itself in dak-
bungalows, I wondered that I had met no ghosts. A ghost that would voluntarily
hang about a dak-bungalow would be mad of course; but so many men have died
mad in dak-bungalows that there must be a fair percentage of lunatic ghosts.

In due time I found my ghost, or ghosts rather, for there were two of them. Up
till that hour I had sympathized with Mr. Besant's method of handling them, as
shown in "The Strange Case of Mr. Lucraft and Other Stories." I am now in the
Opposition.
                              
We will call the bungalow Katmal dak-bungalow. But THAT was the smallest part
of the horror. A man with a sensitive hide has no right to sleep in dak-
bungalows. He should marry. Katmal dak-bungalow was old and rotten and
unrepaired. The floor was of worn brick, the walls were filthy, and the
windows were nearly black with grime. It stood on a bypath largely used by
native Sub-Deputy Assistants of all kinds, from Finance to Forests; but real
Sahibs were rare. The khansamah, who was nearly bent double with old age, said
so.

When I arrived, there was a fitful, undecided rain on the face of the land,
accompanied by a restless wind, and every gust made a noise like the rattling
of dry bones in the stiff toddy palms outside. The khansamah completely lost
his head on my arrival. He had served a Sahib once. Did I know that Sahib? He
gave me the name of a well-known man who has been buried for more than a
quarter of a century, and showed me an ancient daguerreotype of that man in
his prehistoric youth. I had seen a steel engraving of him at the head of a
double volume of Memoirs a month before, and I felt ancient beyond telling.

The day shut in and the khansamah went to get me food. He did not go through
the pretense of calling it "khana"--man's victuals. He said "ratub," and that
means, among other things, "grub"--dog's rations. There was no insult in his
choice of the term. He had forgotten the other word, I suppose.

While he was cutting up the dead bodies of animals, I settled myself down,
after exploring the dak-bungalow. There were three rooms, beside my own, which
was a corner kennel, each giving into the other through dingy white doors
fastened with long iron bars. The bungalow was a very solid one, but the
partition walls of the rooms were almost jerry-built in their flimsiness.
Every step or bang of a trunk echoed from my room down the other three, and
every footfall came back tremulously from the far walls. For this reason I
shut the door. There were no lamps--only candles in long glass shades. An oil
wick was set in the bathroom.

For bleak, unadulterated misery that dak-bungalow was the worst of the many
that I had ever set foot in. There was no fireplace, and the windows would not
open; so a brazier of charcoal would have been useless. The rain and the wind
splashed and gurgled and moaned round the house, and the toddy palms rattled
and roared.

Half a dozen jackals went through the compound singing, and a hyena stood afar
off and mocked them. A hyena would convince a Sadducee of the Resurrection of
the Dead--the worst sort of Dead. Then came the ratub--a curious meal, half
native and half English in composition--with the old khansamah babbling behind
my chair about dead and gone English people, and the wind-blown candles
playing shadow-bo-peep with the bed and the mosquito-curtains. It was just the
sort of dinner and evening to make a man think of every single one of his past
sins, and of all the others that he intended to commit if he lived.

Sleep, for several hundred reasons, was not easy. The lamp in the bath-room
threw the most absurd shadows into the room, and the wind was beginning to
talk nonsense.

Just when the reasons were drowsy with blood-sucking I heard the regular--
"Let--us--take--and--heave--him--over" grunt of doolie-bearers in the
compound. First one doolie came in, then a second, and then a third. I heard
the doolies dumped on the ground, and the shutter in front of my door shook.
"That's some one trying to come in," I said. But no one spoke, and I persuaded
myself that it was the gusty wind. The shutter of the room next to mine was
attacked, flung back, and the inner door opened. "That's some Sub-Deputy
Assistant," I said, "and he has brought his friends with him. Now they'll talk
and spit and smoke for an hour."

But there were no voices and no footsteps. No one was putting his luggage into
the next room. The door shut, and I thanked Providence that I was to be left
in peace. But I was curious to know where the doolies had gone. I got out of
bed and looked into the darkness. There was never a sign of a doolie. Just as
I was getting into bed again, I heard, in the next room, the sound that no man
in his senses can possibly mistake--the whir of a billiard ball down the
length of the slates when the striker is stringing for break. No other sound
is like it. A minute afterwards there was another whir, and I got into bed. I
was not frightened--indeed I was not. I was very curious to know what had
become of the doolies. I jumped into bed for that reason.

Next minute I heard the double click of a cannon and my hair sat up. It is a
mistake to say that hair stands up. The skin of the head tightens and you can
feel a faint, prickly, bristling all over the scalp. That is the hair sitting
up.

There was a whir and a click, and both sounds could only have been made by one
thing--a billiard ball. I argued the matter out at great length with myself;
and the more I argued the less probable it seemed that one bed, one table, and
two chairs--all the furniture of the room next to mine--could so exactly
duplicate the sounds of a game of billiards. After another cannon, a three--
cushion one to judge by the whir, I argued no more. I had found my ghost and
would have given worlds to have escaped from that dak-bungalow. I listened,
and with each listen the game grew clearer.

There was whir on whir and click on click. Sometimes there was a double click
and a whir and another click. Beyond any sort of doubt, people were playing
billiards in the next room. And the next room was not big enough to hold a
billiard table!

Between the pauses of the wind I heard the game go forward--stroke after
stroke. I tried to believe that I could not hear voices; but that attempt was
a failure.

Do you know what fear is? Not ordinary fear of insult, injury or death, but
abject, quivering dread of something that you cannot see--fear that dries the
inside of the mouth and half of the throat--fear that makes you sweat on the
palms of the hands, and gulp in order to keep the uvula at work? This is a
fine Fear--a great cowardice, and must be felt to be appreciated. The very
improbability of billiards in a dak-bungalow proved the reality of the thing.
No man--drunk or sober--could imagine a game at billiards, or invent the
spitting crack of a "screw-cannon."

A severe course of dak-bungalows has this disadvantage--it breeds infinite
credulity. If a man said to a confirmed dak-bungalow- haunter:--"There is a
corpse in the next room, and there's a mad girl in the next but one, and the
woman and man on that camel have just eloped from a place sixty miles away,"
the hearer would not disbelieve because he would know that nothing is too
wild, grotesque, or horrible to happen in a dak-bungalow.

This credulity, unfortunately, extends to ghosts. A rational person fresh from
his own house would have turned on his side and slept. I did not. So surely as
I was given up as a bad carcass by the scores of things in the bed because the
bulk of my blood was in my heart, so surely did I hear every stroke of a long
game at billiards played in the echoing room behind the iron-barred door. My
dominant fear was that the players might want a marker. It was an absurd fear;
because creatures who could play in the dark would be above such
superfluities. I only know that that was my terror; and it was real.

After a long, long while the game stopped, and the door banged. I slept
because I was dead tired. Otherwise I should have preferred to have kept
awake. Not for everything in Asia would I have dropped the door-bar and peered
into the dark of the next room.

When the morning came, I considered that I had done well and wisely, and
inquired for the means of departure.

"By the way, khansamah," I said, "what were those three doolies doing in my
compound in the night?"

"There were no doolies," said the khansamah.

I went into the next room and the daylight streamed through the open door. I
was immensely brave. I would, at that hour, have played Black Pool with the
owner of the big Black Pool down below.

"Has this place always been a dak-bungalow?" I asked.

"No," said the khansamah. "Ten or twenty years ago, I have forgotten how long,
it was a billiard room."

"A how much?"

"A billiard room for the Sahibs who built the Railway. I was khansamah then in
the big house where all the Railway-Sahibs lived, and I used to come across
with brandy-shrab. These three rooms were all one, and they held a big table
on which the Sahibs played every evening. But the Sahibs are all dead now, and
the Railway runs, you say, nearly to Kabul."

"Do you remember anything about the Sahibs?"

"It is long ago, but I remember that one Sahib, a fat man and always angry,
was playing here one night, and he said to me:--'Mangal Khan, brandy-pani do,'
and I filled the glass, and he bent over the table to strike, and his head
fell lower and lower till it hit the table, and his spectacles came off, and
when we--the Sahibs and I myself--ran to lift him he was dead. I helped to
carry him out. Aha, he was a strong Sahib! But he is dead and I, old Mangal
Khan, am still living, by your favor."

That was more than enough! I had my ghost--a firsthand, authenticated article.
I would write to the Society for Psychical Research--I would paralyze the
Empire with the news! But I would, first of all, put eighty miles of assessed
crop land between myself and that dak-bungalow before nightfall. The Society
might send their regular agent to investigate later on.

I went into my own room and prepared to pack after noting down the facts of
the case. As I smoked I heard the game begin again,--with a miss in balk this
time, for the whir was a short one.

The door was open and I could see into the room. Click--c1ick! That was a
cannon. I entered the room without fear, for there was sunlight within and a
fresh breeze without. The unseen game was going on at a tremendous rate. And
well it might, when a restless little rat was running to and fro inside the
dingy ceiling-cloth, and a piece of loose window-sash was making fifty breaks
off the window-bolt as it shook in the breeze!

Impossible to mistake the sound of billiard balls! Impossible to mistake the
whir of a ball over the slate! But I was to be excused. Even when I shut my
enlightened eyes the sound was marvelously like that of a fast game.

Entered angrily the faithful partner of my sorrows, Kadir Baksh.

"This bungalow is very bad and low-caste! No wonder the Presence was disturbed
and is speckled. Three sets of doolie-bearers came to the bungalow late last
night when I was sleeping outside, and said that it was their custom to rest
in the rooms set apart for the English people! What honor has the khansamah?
They tried to enter, but I told them to go. No wonder, if these Oorias have
been here, that the Presence is sorely spotted. It is shame, and the work of a
dirty man!"

Kadir Baksh did not say that he had taken from each gang two annas for rent in
advance, and then, beyond my earshot, had beaten them with the big green
umbrella whose use I could never before divine. But Kadir Baksh has no notions
of morality.

There was an interview with the khansamah, but as he promptly lost his head,
wrath gave place to pity, and pity led to a long conversation, in the course
of which he put the fat Engineer-Sahib's tragic death in three separate
stations--two of them fifty miles away. The third shift was to Calcutta, and
there the Sahib died while driving a dogcart.

If I had encouraged him the khansamah would have wandered all through Bengal
with his corpse.

I did not go away as soon as I intended. I stayed for the night, while the
wind and the rat and the sash and the window-bolt played a ding-dong "hundred
and fifty up." Then the wind ran out and the billiards stopped, and I felt
that I had ruined my one genuine, hall-marked ghost story.

Had I only stopped at the proper time, I could have made anything out of it.

That was the bitterest thought of all!


THE STRANGE RIDE OF MORROWBIE JUKES

 Alive or dead-there is no other way.
             --Native Proverb.

THERE is, as the conjurers say, no deception about this tale. Jukes by
accident stumbled upon a village that is well known to exist, though he is the
only Englishman who has been there. A somewhat similar institution used to
flourish on the outskirts of Calcutta, and there is a story that if you go
into the heart of Bikanir, which is in the heart of the Great Indian Desert,
you shall come across not a village but a town where the Dead who did not die
but may not live have established their headquarters. And, since it is
perfectly true that in the same Desert is a wonderful city where all the rich
money lenders retreat after they have made their fortunes (fortunes so vast
that the owners cannot trust even the strong hand of the Government to protect
them, but take refuge in the waterless sands), and drive sumptuous C-spring
barouches, and buy beautiful girls and decorate their palaces with gold and
ivory and Minton tiles and mother-of-pearl, I do not see why Jukes's tale
should not be true. He is a Civil Engineer, with a head for plans and
distances and things of that kind, and he certainly would not take the trouble
to invent imaginary traps. He could earn more by doing his legitimate work. He
never varies the tale in the telling, and grows very hot and indignant when he
thinks of the disrespectful treatment he received. He wrote this quite
straightforwardly at first, but he has since touched it up in places and
introduced Moral Reflections, thus:

In the beginning it all arose from a slight attack of fever. My work
necessitated my being in camp for some months between Pakpattan and
Muharakpur--a desolate sandy stretch of country as every one who has had the
misfortune to go there may know. My coolies were neither more nor less
exasperating than other gangs, and my work demanded sufficient attention to
keep me from moping, had I been inclined to so unmanly a weakness.

On the 23d December, 1884, I felt a little feverish. There was a full moon at
the time, and, in consequence, every dog near my tent was baying it. The
brutes assembled in twos and threes and drove me frantic. A few days
previously I had shot one loud-mouthed singer and suspended his carcass in
terrorem about fifty yards from my tent-door. But his friends fell upon,
fought for, and ultimately devoured the body; and, as it seemed to me, sang
their hymns of thanksgiving afterward with renewed energy.

The light-heartedness which accompanies fever acts differently on different
men. My irritation gave way, after a short time, to a fixed determination to
slaughter one huge black and white beast who had been foremost in song and
first in flight throughout the evening. Thanks to a shaking hand and a giddy
head I had already missed him twice with both barrels of my shot-gun, when it
struck me that my best plan would be to ride him down in the open and finish
him off with a hog-spear. This, of course, was merely the semi-delirious
notion of a fever patient; but I remember that it struck me at the time as
being eminently practical and feasible.

I therefore ordered my groom to saddle Pornic and bring him round quietly to
the rear of my tent. When the pony was ready, I stood at his head prepared to
mount and dash out as soon as the dog should again lift up his voice. Pornic,
by the way, had not been out of his pickets for a couple of days; the night
air was crisp and chilly; and I was armed with a specially long and sharp pair
of persuaders with which I had been rousing a sluggish cob that afternoon. You
will easily believe, then, that when he was let go he went quickly. In one
moment, for the brute bolted as straight as a die, the tent was left far
behind, and we were flying over the smooth sandy soil at racing speed.

In another we had passed the wretched dog, and I had almost forgotten why it
was that I had taken the horse and hogspear.

The delirium of fever and the excitement of rapid motion through the air must
have taken away the remnant of my senses. I have a faint recollection of
standing upright in my stirrups, and of brandishing my hog-spear at the great
white Moon that looked down so calmly on my mad gallop; and of shouting
challenges to the camel-thorn bushes as they whizzed past. Once or twice I
believe, I swayed forward on Pornic's neck, and literally hung on by my spurs-
-as the marks next morning showed.

The wretched beast went forward like a thing possessed, over what seemed to be
a limitless expanse of moonlit sand. Next, I remember, the ground rose
suddenly in front of us, and as we topped the ascent I saw the waters of the
Sutlej shining like a silver bar below. Then Pornic blundered heavily on his
nose, and we rolled together down some unseen slope.

I must have lost consciousness, for when I recovered I was lying on my stomach
in a heap of soft white sand, and the dawn was beginning to break dimly over
the edge of the slope down which I had fallen. As the light grew stronger I
saw that I was at the bottom of a horse-shoe shaped crater of sand, opening on
one side directly on to the shoals of the Sutlej. My fever had altogether left
me, and, with the exception of a slight dizziness in the head, I felt no had
effects from the fall over night.

Pornic, who was standing a few yards away, was naturally a good deal
exhausted, but had not hurt himself in the least. His saddle, a favorite polo
one, was much knocked about, and had been twisted under his belly. It took me
some time to put him to rights, and in the meantime I had ample opportunities
of observing the spot into which I had so foolishly dropped.

At the risk of being considered tedious, I must describe it at length:
inasmuch as an accurate mental picture of its peculiarities will be of
material assistance in enabling the reader to understand what follows.

Imagine then, as I have said before, a horseshoe-shaped crater of sand with
steeply graded sand walls about thirty-five feet high. (The slope, I fancy,
must have been about 65 degrees.) This crater enclosed a level piece of ground
about fifty yards long by thirty at its broadest part, with a crude well in
the centre. Round the bottom of the crater, about three feet from the level of
the ground proper, ran a series of eighty-three semi-circular ovoid, square,
and multilateral holes, all about three feet at the mouth. Each hole on
inspection showed that it was carefully shored internally with drift-wood and
bamboos, and over the mouth a wooden drip-board projected, like the peak of a
jockey's cap, for two feet. No sign of life was visible in these tunnels, but
a most sickening stench pervaded the entire amphitheatre--a stench fouler than
any which my wanderings in Indian villages have introduced me to.

Having remounted Pornic, who was as anxious as I to get back to camp, I rode
round the base of the horseshoe to find some place whence an exit would be
practicable. The inhabitants, whoever they might be, had not thought fit to
put in an appearance, so I was left to my own devices. My first attempt to
"rush" Pornic up the steep sand-banks showed me that I had fallen into a trap
exactly on the same model as that which the ant-lion sets for its prey. At
each step the shifting sand poured down from above in tons, and rattled on the
drip-boards of the holes like small shot. A couple of ineffectual charges sent
us both rolling down to the bottom, half choked with the torrents of sand; and
I was constrained to turn my attention to the river-bank.

Here everything seemed easy enough. The sand hills ran down to the river edge,
it is true, but there were plenty of shoals and shallows across which I could
gallop Pornic, and find my way back to terra firma by turning sharply to the
right or left. As I led Pornic over the sands I was startled by the faint pop
of a rifle across the river; and at the same moment a bullet dropped with a
sharp "whit" close to Pornic's head.

There was no mistaking the nature of the missile-a regulation Martini-Henry
"picket." About five hundred yards away a country-boat was anchored in
midstream; and a jet of smoke drifting away from its bows in the still morning
air showed me whence the delicate attention had come. Was ever a respectable
gentleman in such an impasse? The treacherous sand slope allowed no escape
from a spot which I had visited most involuntarily, and a promenade on the
river frontage was the signal for a bombardment from some insane native in a
boat. I'm afraid that I lost my temper very much indeed.

Another bullet reminded me that I had better save my breath to cool my
porridge; and I retreated hastily up the sands and back to the horseshoe,
where I saw that the noise of the rifle had drawn sixty-five human beings from
the badger-holes which I had up till that point supposed to be untenanted. I
found myself in the midst of a crowd of spectators--about forty men, twenty
women, and one child who could not have been more than five years old. They
were all scantily clothed in that salmon-colored cloth which one associates
with Hindu mendicants, and, at first sight, gave me the impression of a band
of loathsome fakirs. The filth and repulsiveness of the assembly were beyond
all description, and I shuddered to think what their life in the badger-holes
must be.

Even in these days, when local self government has destroyed the greater part
of a native's respect for a Sahib, I have been accustomed to a certain amount
of civility from my inferiors, and on approaching the crowd naturally expected
that there would be some recognition of my presence. As a matter of fact there
was; but it was by no means what I had looked for.

The ragged crew actually laughed at me--such laughter I hope I may never hear
again.  They cackled, yelled, whistled, and howled as I walked into their
midst; some of them literally throwing themselves down on the ground in
convulsions of unholy mirth. In a moment I had let go Pornic's head, and.
irritated beyond expression at the morning's adventure, commenced cuffing
those nearest to me with all the force I could. The wretches dropped under my
blows like nine-pins, and the laughter gave place to wails for mercy; while
those yet untouched clasped me round the knees, imploring me in all sorts of
uncouth tongues to spare them.

In the tumult, and just when I was feeling very much ashamed of myself for
having thus easily given way to my temper, a thin, high voice murmured in
English from behind my shoulder: "--Sahib! Sahib! Do you not know me? Sahib,
it is Gunga Dass, the telegraph-master."

I spun round quickly and faced the speaker.

Gunga Dass, (I have, of course, no hesitation in mentioning the man's real
name) I had known four years before as a Deccanee Brahmin loaned by the Punjab
Government to one of the Khalsia States. He was in charge of a branch
telegraph-office there, and when I had last met him was a jovial, full-
stomached, portly Government servant with a marvelous capacity for making had
puns in English--a peculiarity which made me remember him long after I had
forgotten his services to me in his official capacity. It is seldom that a
Hindu makes English puns.

Now, however, the man was changed beyond all recognition. Caste-mark, stomach,
slate-colored continuations, and unctuous speech were all gone. I looked at a
withered skeleton, turban-less and almost naked, with long matted hair and
deep-set codfish-eyes.

But for a crescent-shaped scar on the left cheek--the result of an accident
for which I was responsible I should never have known him. But it was
indubitably Gunga Dass, and--for this I was thankful--an English-speaking
native who might at least tell me the meaning of all that I had gone through
that day.

The crowd retreated to some distance as I turned toward the miserable figure,
and ordered him to show me some method of escaping from the crate. He held a
freshly plucked crow in his hand, and in reply to my question climbed slowly
on a platform of sand which ran in front of the holes, and commenced lighting
a fire there in silence. Dried bents, sand-poppies, and driftwood burn
quickly; and I derived much consolation from the fact that he lit them with an
ordinary sulphur-match. When they were in a bright glow, and the crow was
neatly spitted in front thereof, Gunga Dass began without a word of preamble:

"There are only two kinds of men, Sar. The alive and the dead. When you are
dead you are dead, but when you are alive you live." (Here the crow demanded
his attention for an instant as it twirled before the fire in danger of being
burned to a cinder.) "If you die at home and do not die when you come to the
ghat to be burned you come here."

The nature of the reeking village was made plain now, and all that I had known
or read of the grotesque and the horrible paled before the fact just
communicated by the ex-Brahmin. Sixteen years ago, when I first landed in
Bombay, I had been told by a wandering Armenian of the existence, somewhere in
India, of a place to which such Hindus as had the misfortune to recover from
trance or catalepsy were conveyed and kept, and I recollect laughing heartily
at what I was then pleased to consider a traveler's tale.

Sitting at the bottom of the sand-trap, the memory of Watson's Hotel, with its
swinging punkahs, white-robed attendants, and the sallow-faced Armenian, rose
up in my mind as vividly as a photograph, and I burst into a loud fit of
laughter. The contrast was too absurd!

Gunga Dass, as he bent over the unclean bird, watched me curiously. Hindus
seldom laugh, and his surroundings were not such as to move Gunga Dass to any
undue excess of hilarity. He removed the crow solemnly from the wooden spit
and as solemnly devoured it. Then he continued his story, which I give in his
own words:

"In epidemics of the cholera you are carried to be burned almost before you
are dead. When you come to the riverside the cold air, perhaps, makes you
alive, and then, if you are only little alive, mud is put on your nose and
mouth and you die conclusively. If you are rather more alive, more mud is put;
but if you are too lively they let you go and take you away. I was too lively,
and made protestation with anger against the indignities that they endeavored
to press upon me. In those days I was Brahmin and proud man.

Now I am dead man and eat"--here he eyed the well-gnawed breast bone with the
first sign of emotion that I had seen in him since we met--"crows, and other
things. They took me from my sheets when they saw that I was too lively and
gave me medicines for one week, and I survived successfully. Then they sent me
by rail from my place to Okara Station, with a man to take care of me; and at
Okara Station we met two other men, and they conducted we three on camels, in
the night, from Okara Station to this place, and they propelled me from the
top to the bottom, and the other two succeeded, and I have been here ever
since two and a half years. Once I was Brahmin and proud man, and now I eat
crows."

"There is no way of getting out?"

"None of what kind at all. When I first came I made experiments frequently and
all the others also, but we have always succumbed to the sand which is
precipitated upon our heads."

"But surely," I broke in at this point, "the river-front is open, and it is
worth while dodging the bullets; while at night"--I had already matured a
rough plan of escape which a natural instinct of selfishness forbade me
sharing with Gunga Dass. He, however, divined my unspoken thought almost as
soon as it was formed; and, to my intense astonishment, gave vent to a long
low chuckle of derision--the laughter, be it understood, of a superior or at
least of an equal.

"You will not"--he had dropped the Sir completely after his opening sentence--
"make any escape that way. But you can try. I have tried. Once only."

The sensation of nameless terror and abject fear which I had in vain attempted
to strive against overmastered me completely. My long fast--it was now close
upon ten o'clock, and I had eaten nothing since tiffin on the previous day--
combined with the violent and unnatural agitation of the ride had exhausted
me, and I verily believe that, for a few minutes, I acted as one mad. I hurled
myself against the pitiless sand-slope. I ran round the base of the crater,
blaspheming and praying by turns. I crawled out among the sedges of the river-
front, only to be driven back each time in an agony of nervous dread by the
rifle-bullets which cut up the sand round me--for I dared not face the death
of a mad dog among that hideous crowd--and finally fell, spent and raving, at
the curb of the well. No one had taken the slightest notion of an exhibition
which makes me blush hotly even when I think of it now.

Two or three men trod on my panting body as they drew water, but they were
evidently used to this sort of thing, and had no time to waste upon me. The
situation was humiliating. Gunga Dass, indeed, when he had banked the embers
of his fire with sand, was at some pains to throw half a cupful of fetid water
over my head, an attention for which I could have fallen on my knees and
thanked him, but he was laughing all the while in the same mirthless, wheezy
key that greeted me on my first attempt to force the shoals. And so, in a
semi-comatose condition, I lay till noon.

Then, being only a man after all, I felt hungry, and intimated as much to
Gunga Dass, whom I had begun to regard as my natural protector. Following the
impulse of the outer world when dealing with natives, I put my hand into my
pocket and drew out four annas. The absurdity of the gift struck me at once,
and I was about to replace the money.

Gunga Dass, however, was of a different opinion. "Give me the money," said he;
"all you have, or I will get help, and we will kill you!" All this as if it
were the most natural thing in the world!

A Briton's first impulse, I believe, is to guard the contents of his pockets;
but a moment's reflection convinced me of the futility of differing with the
one man who had it in his power to make me comfortable; and with whose help it
was possible that I might eventually escape from the crater. I gave him all
the money in my possession, Rs. 9-8-5--nine rupees eight annas and five pie--
for I always keep small change as bakshish when I am in camp. Gunga Dass
clutched the coins, and hid them at once in his ragged loin cloth, his
expression changing to something diabolical as he looked round to assure
himself that no one had observed us.

"Now I will give you something to eat," said he.

What pleasure the possession of my money could have afforded him I am unable
to say; but inasmuch as it did give him evident delight I was not sorry that I
had parted with it so readily, for I had no doubt that he would have had me
killed if I had refused. One does not protest against the vagaries of a den of
wild beasts; and my companions were lower than any beasts. While I devoured
what Gunga Dass had provided, a coarse chapatti and a cupful of the foul well-
water, the people showed not the faintest sign of curiosity--that curiosity
which is so rampant, as a rule, in an Indian village.

I could even fancy that they despised me. At all events they treated me with
the most chilling indifference, and Gunga Dass was nearly as bad. I plied him
with questions about the terrible village, and received extremely
unsatisfactory answers. So far as I could gather, it had been in existence
from time immemorial--whence I concluded that it was at least a century old--
and during that time no one had ever been known to escape from it. [I had to
control myself here with both hands, lest the blind terror should lay hold of
me a second time and drive me raving round the crater.] Gunga Dass took a
malicious pleasure in emphasizing this point and in watching me wince. Nothing
that I could do would induce him to tell me who the mysterious "They" were.

"It is so ordered," he would reply, "and I do not yet know any one who has
disobeyed the orders."

"Only wait till my servants find that I am missing," I retorted, "and I
promise you that this place shall be cleared off the face of the earth, and
I'll give you a lesson in civility, too, my friend."

"Your servants would be torn in pieces before they came near this place; and,
besides, you are dead, my dear friend. It is not your fault, of course, but
none the less you are dead and buried."

At irregular intervals supplies of food, I was told, were dropped down from
the land side into the amphitheatre, and the inhabitants fought for them like
wild beasts. When a man felt his death coming on he retreated to his lair and
died there. The body was sometimes dragged out of the hole and thrown on to
the sand, or allowed to rot where it lay.

The phrase "thrown on to the sand" caught my attention, and I asked Gunga Dass
whether this sort of thing was not likely to breed a pestilence.

"That." said he. with another of his wheezy chuckles, "you may see for
yourself subsequently. You will have much time to make observations."

Whereat, to his great delight, I winced once more and hastily continued the
conversation :--"And how do you live here from day to day? What do you do?"
The question elicited exactly the same answer as before coupled with the
information that "this place is like your European heaven; there is neither
marrying nor giving in marriage."

Gunga Dass had been educated at a Mission School, and, as he himself admitted,
had he only changed his religion "like a wise man," might have avoided the
living grave which was now his portion. But as long as I was with him I fancy
he was happy.

Here was a Sahib, a representative of the dominant race, helpless as a child
and completely at the mercy of his native neighbors. In a deliberate lazy way
he set himself to torture me as a schoolboy would devote a rapturous half-hour
to watching the agonies of an impaled beetle, or as a ferret in a blind burrow
might glue himself comfortably to the neck of a rabbit. The burden of his
conversation was that there was no escape "of no kind whatever," and that I
should stay here till I died and was "thrown on to the sand." If it were
possible to forejudge the conversation of the Damned on the advent of a new
soul in their abode, I should say that they would speak as Gunga Dass did to
me throughout that long afternoon. I was powerless to protest or answer; all
my energies being devoted to a struggle against the inexplicable terror that
threatened to overwhelm me again and again. I can compare the feeling to
nothing except the struggles of a man against the overpowering nausea of the
Channel passage--only my agony was of the spirit and infinitely more terrible.

As the day wore on, the inhabitants began to appear in full strength to catch
the rays of the afternoon sun, which were now sloping in at the mouth of the
crater. They assembled in little knots, and talked among themselves without
even throwing a glance in my direction. About four o'clock, as far as I could
judge Gunga Dass rose and dived into his lair for a moment, emerging with a
live crow in his hands. The wretched bird was in a most draggled and
deplorable condition, but seemed to be in no way afraid of its master,
Advancing cautiously to the river front, Gunga Dass stepped from tussock to
tussock until he had reached a smooth patch of sand directly in the line of
the boat's fire. The occupants of the boat took no notice. Here he stopped,
and, with a couple of dexterous turns of the wrist, pegged the bird on its
back with outstretched wings. As was only natural, the crow began to shriek at
once and beat the air with its claws. In a few seconds the clamor had
attracted the attention of a bevy of wild crows on a shoal a few hundred yards
away, where they were discussing something that looked like a corpse. Half a
dozen crows flew over at once to see what was going on, and also, as it
proved, to attack the pinioned bird. Gunga Dass, who had lain down on a
tussock, motioned to me to be quiet, though I fancy this was a needless
precaution. In a moment, and before I could see how it happened, a wild crow,
who had grappled with the shrieking and helpless bird, was entangled in the
latter's claws, swiftly disengaged by Gunga Dass, and pegged down beside its
companion in adversity. Curiosity, it seemed, overpowered the rest of the
flock, and almost before Gunga Dass and I had time to withdraw to the tussock,
two more captives were struggling in the upturned claws of the decoys. So the
chase--if I can give it so dignified a name--continued until Gunga Dass had
captured seven crows. Five of them he throttled at once, reserving two for
further operations another day. I was a good deal impressed by this, to me,
novel method of securing food, and complimented Gunga Dass on his skill.

"It is nothing to do," said he. "Tomorrow you must do it for me. You are
stronger than I am."

This calm assumption of superiority Upset me not a little, and I answered
peremptorily;--"Indeed, you old ruffian! What do you think I have given you
money for?"

"Very well," was the unmoved reply. "Perhaps not tomorrow, nor the day after,
nor subsequently; but in the end, and for many years, you will catch crows and
eat crows, and you will thank your European God that you have crows to catch
and eat."

I could have cheerfully strangled him for this; but judged it best under the
circumstances to smother my resentment. An hour later I was eating one of the
crows; and, as Gunga Dass had said, thanking my God that I had a crow to eat.
Never as long as I live shall I forget that evening meal. The whole population
were squatting on the hard sand platform opposite their dens, huddled over
tiny fires of refuse and dried rushes. Death, having once laid his hand upon
these men and forborne to strike, seemed to stand aloof from them now; for
most of our company were old men, bent and worn and twisted with years, and
women aged to all appearance as the Fates themselves. They sat together in
knots and talked--God only knows what they found to discuss--in low equable
tones, curiously in contrast to the strident babble with which natives are
accustomed to make day hideous. Now and then an access of that sudden fury
which had possessed me in the morning would lay hold on a man or woman; and
with yells and imprecations the sufferer would attack the steep slope until,
baffled and bleeding, he fell back on the platform incapable of moving a limb.
The others would never even raise their eyes when this happened, as men too
well aware of the futility of their fellows' attempts and wearied with their
useless repetition. I saw four such outbursts in the course of the evening.

Gunga Dass took an eminently business-like view of my situation, and while we
were dining--I can afford to laugh at the recollection now, but it was painful
enough at the time- propounded the terms on which he would consent to "do" for
me. My nine rupees eight annas, he argued, at the rate of three annas a day,
would provide me with food for fifty-one days, or about seven weeks; that is
to say, he would be willing to cater for me for that length of time. At the
end of it I was to look after myself. For a further consideration--videlicet
my boots--he would be willing to allow me to occupy the den next to his own,
and would supply me with as much dried grass for bedding as he could spare.

"Very well, Gunga Dass," I replied; "to the first terms I cheerfully agree,
but, as there is nothing on earth to prevent my killing you as you sit here
and taking everything that you have" (I thought of the two invaluable crows at
the time), "I flatly refuse to give you my boots and shall take whichever den
I please."

The stroke was a bold one, and I was glad when I saw that it had succeeded.
Gunga Dass changed his tone immediately, and disavowed all intention of asking
for my boots. At the time it did not strike me as at all strange that I, a
Civil Engineer, a man of thirteen years' standing in the Service, and, I
trust, an average Englishman, should thus calmly threaten murder and violence
against the man who had, for a consideration it is true, taken me under his
wing. I had left the world, it seemed, for centuries. I was as certain then as
I am now of my own existence, that in the accursed settlement there was no law
save that of the strongest; that the living dead men had thrown behind them
every canon of the world which had cast them out; and that I had to depend for
my own life on my strength and vigilance alone. The crew of the ill-fated
Mignonette are the only men who would understand my frame of mind. "At
present," I argued to myself, "I am strong and a match for six of these
wretches. It is imperatively necessary that I should, for my own sake, keep
both health and strength until the hour of my release comes--if it ever does."

Fortified with these resolutions, I ate and drank as much as I could, and made
Gunga Dass understand that I intended to be his master, and that the least
sign of insubordination on his part would be visited with the only punishment
I had it in my power to inflict--sudden and violent death. Shortly after this
I went to bed.

That is to say, Gunga Dass gave me a double armful of dried bents which I
thrust down the mouth of the lair to the right of his, and followed myself,
feet foremost; the hole running about nine feet into the sand with a slight
downward inclination, and being neatly shored with timbers. From my den, which
faced the river-front, I was able to watch the waters of the Sutlej flowing
past under the light of a young moon and compose myself to sleep as best I
might.

The horrors of that night I shall never forget. My den was nearly as narrow as
a coffin, and the sides had been worn smooth and greasy by the contact of
innumerable naked bodies, added to which it smelled abominably. Sleep was
altogether out of question to one in my excited frame of mind. As the night
wore on, it seemed that the entire amphitheatre was filled with legions of
unclean devils that, trooping up from the shoals below, mocked the
unfortunates in their lairs.

Personally I am not of an imaginative temperament,--very few Engineers are,--
but on that occasion I was as completely prostrated with nervous terror as any
woman. After half an hour or so, however, I was able once more to calmly
review my chances of escape. Any exit by the steep sand walls was, of course,
impracticable. I had been thoroughly convinced of this some time before. It
was possible, just possible, that I might, in the uncertain moonlight, safely
run the gauntlet of the rifle shots. The place was so full of terror for me
that I was prepared to undergo any risk in leaving it. Imagine my delight,
then, when after creeping stealthily to the river-front I found that the
infernal boat was not there. My freedom lay before me in the next few steps!

By walking out to the first shallow pool that lay at the foot of the
projecting left horn of the horseshoe, I could wade across, turn the flank of
the crater, and make my way inland. Without a moment's hesitation I marched
briskly past the tussocks where Gunga Dass had snared the crows, and out in
the direction of the smooth white sand beyond. My first step from the tufts of
dried grass showed me how utterly futile was any hope of escape; for, as I put
my foot down, I felt an indescribable drawing, sucking motion of the sand
below. Another moment and my leg was swallowed up nearly to the knee. In the
moonlight the whole surface of the sand seemed to be shaken with devilish
delight at my disappointment. I struggled clear, sweating with terror and
exertion, back to the tussocks behind me and fell on my face.

My only means of escape from the semicircle was protected with a quicksand!

How long I lay I have not the faintest idea; but I was roused at last by the
malevolent chuckle of Gunga Dass at my ear. "I would advise you, Protector of
the Poor" (the ruffian was speaking English) "to return to your house. It is
unhealthy to lie down here. Moreover, when the boat returns, you will most
certainly be rifled at." He stood over me in the dim light of the dawn,
chuckling and laughing to himself. Suppressing my first impulse to catch the
man by the neck and throw him on to the quicksand, I rose sullenly and
followed him to the platform below the burrows.

Suddenly, and futilely as I thought while I spoke, I asked--"Gunga Dass, what
is the good of the boat if I can't get out anyhow?" I recollect that even in
my deepest trouble I had been speculating vaguely on the waste of ammunition
in guarding an already well protected foreshore.

Gunga Dass laughed again and made answer:--"They have the boat only in
daytime. It is for the reason that there is a way. I hope we shall have the
pleasure of your company for much longer time. It is a pleasant spot when you
have been here some years and eaten roast crow long enough."

I staggered, numbed and helpless, toward the fetid burrow allotted to me, and
fell asleep. An hour or so later I was awakened by a piercing scream--the
shrill, high-pitched scream of a horse in pain. Those who have once heard that
will never forget the sound. I found some little difficulty in scrambling out
of the burrow. When I was in the open, I saw Pornic, my poor old Pornic, lying
dead on the sandy soil. How they had killed him I cannot guess.  Gunga Dass
explained that horse was better than crow, and "greatest good of greatest
number is political maxim. We are now Republic, Mister Jukes, and you are
entitled to a fair share of the beast. If you like, we will pass a vote of
thanks. Shall I propose?"

Yes, we were a Republic indeed! A Republic of wild beasts penned at the bottom
of a pit, to eat and fight and sleep till we died. I attempted no protest of
any kind, but sat down and stared at the hideous sight in front of me. In less
time almost than it takes me to write this, Pornic's body was divided, in some
unclear way or other; the men and women had dragged the fragments on to the
platform and were preparing their normal meal. Gunga Dass cooked mine. The
almost irresistible impulse to fly at the sand walls until I was wearied laid
hold of me afresh, and I had to struggle against it with all my might. Gunga
Dass was offensively jocular till I told him that if he addressed another
remark of any kind whatever to me I should strangle him where he sat. This
silenced him till silence became insupportable, and I bade him say something.

"You will live here till you die like the other Feringhi," he said, coolly,
watching me over the fragment of gristle that he was gnawing.

"What other Sahib, you swine? Speak at once, and don't stop to tell me a lie."

"He is over there," answered Gunga Dass, pointing to a burrow-mouth about four
doors ta the left of my own. "You can see for yourself. He died in the burrow
as you will die, and I will die, and as all these men and women and the one
child will also die."

"For pity's sake tell me all you know about him. Who was he? When did he come,
and when did he die?"

This appeal was a weak step on my part. Gunga Dass only leered and replied:--
"I will not--unless you give me something first."

Then I recollected where I was, and struck the man between the eyes, partially
stunning him. He stepped down from the platform at once, and, cringing and
fawning and weeping and attempting to embrace my feet, led me round to the
burrow which he had indicated.

"I know nothing whatever about the gentleman. Your God be my witness that I do
not. He was as anxious to escape as you were, and he was shot from the boat,
though we all did all things to prevent him from attempting. He was shot
here." Gunga Dass laid his hand on his lean stomach and bowed to the earth.

"Well, and what then? Go on!"

"And then--and then, Your Honor, we carried him in to his house and gave him
water, and put wet cloths on the wound, and he laid down in his house and gave
up the ghost."

"In how long? In how long?"

"About half an hour, after he received his wound. I call Vishnu to witness,"
yelled the wretched man, "that I did everything for him. Everything which was
possible, that I did!"

He threw himself down on the ground and clasped my ankles. But I had my doubts
about Gunga Dass's benevolence, and kicked him off as he lay protesting.

"I believe you robbed him of everything he had. But I can find out in a minute
or two. How long was the Sahib here?"

"Nearly a year and a half. I think he must have gone mad. But hear me swear,
Protector of the Poor! Won't Your Honor hear me swear that I never touched an
article that belonged to him? What is Your Worship going to do?"

I had taken Gunga Dass by the waist and had hauled him on to the platform
opposite the deserted burrow. As I did so I thought of my wretched fellow-
prisoner's unspeakable misery among all these horrors for eighteen months, and
the final agony of dying like a rat in a hole, with a bullet-wound in the
stomach. Gunga Dass fancied I was going to kill him and howled pitifully. The
rest of the population, in the plethora that follows a full flesh meal,
watched us without stirring.

"Go inside, Gunga Dass," said I, "and fetch it out."

I was feeling sick and faint with horror now. Gunga Dass nearly rolled off the
platform and howled aloud.

"But I am Brahmin, Sahib--a high-caste Brahmin. By your soul, by your father's
soul, do not make me do this thing!"

"Brahmin or no Brahmin, by my soul and my father's soul, in you go!" I said,
and, seizing him by the shoulders, I crammed his head into the mouth of the
burrow, kicked the rest of him in, and, sitting down, covered my face with my
hands.

At the end of a few minutes I heard a rustle and a creak; then Gunga Dass in a
sobbing, choking whisper speaking to himself; then a soft thud--and I
uncovered my eyes.

The dry sand had turned the corpse entrusted to its keeping into a yellow-
brown mummy. I told Gunga Dass to stand off while I examined it.

The body--clad in an olive-green hunting-suit much stained and worn, with
leather pads on the shoulders--was that of a man between thirty and forty,
above middle height, with light, sandy hair, long mustache, and a rough
unkempt beard. The left canine of the upper jaw was missing, and a portion of
the lobe of the right ear was gone. On the second finger of the left hand was
a ring--a shield-shaped bloodstone set in gold, with a monogram that might
have been either "B.K." or "B.L." On the third finger of the right hand was a
silver ring in the shape of a coiled cobra, much worn and tarnished. Gunga
Dass deposited a handful of trifles he had picked out of the burrow at my
feet, and, covering the face of the body with my handkerchief, I turned to
examine these. I give the full list in the hope that it may lead to the
identification of the unfortunate man:

1. Bowl of a briarwood pipe, serrated at the edge; much worn and blackened;
bound with string at the crew.

2. Two patent-lever keys; wards of both broken.

3. Tortoise-shell-handled penknife, silver or nickel name-plate, marked with
monogram "B.K."

4. Envelope, postmark Undecipherable, bearing a Victorian stamp, addressed to
"Miss Mon-" (rest illegible) -"ham"-"nt."

5. Imitation crocodile-skin notebook with pencil.  First forty-five pages
blank; four and a half illegible; fifteen others filled with private memoranda
relating chiefly to three persons--a Mrs. L. Singleton, abbreviated several
times to "Lot Single," "Mrs. S. May," and "Garmison," referred to in places as
"Jerry" or "Jack."

6.Handle of small-sized hunting-knife. Blade snapped short. Buck's horn,
diamond cut, with swivel and ring on the butt; fragment of cotton cord
attached.

It must not be supposed that I inventoried all these things on the spot as
fully as I have here written them down. The notebook first attracted my
attention, and I put it in my pocket with a view of studying it later on.

The rest of the articles I conveyed to my burrow for safety's sake, and there
being a methodical man, I inventoried them. I then returned to the corpse and
ordered Gunga Dass to help me to carry it out to the river-front. While we
were engaged in this, the exploded shell of an old brown cartridge dropped out
of one of the pockets and rolled at my feet. Gunga Dass had not seen it; and I
fell to thinking that a man does not carry exploded cartridge-cases,
especially "browns," which will not bear loading twice, about with him when
shooting. In other words, that cartridge-case had been fired inside the
crater. Consequently there must be a gun somewhere. I was on the verge of
asking Gunga Dass, but checked myself, knowing that he would lie. We laid the
body down on the edge of the quicksand by the tussocks. It was my intention to
push it out and let it be swallowed up--the only possible mode of burial that
I could think of. I ordered Gunga Dass to go away.

Then I gingerly put the corpse out on the quicksand. In doing so--it was lying
face downward--I tore the frail and rotten khaki shooting-coat open,
disclosing a hideous cavity in the back. I have already told you that the dry
sand had, as it were, mummified the body. A moment's glance showed that the
gaping hole had been caused by a gun-shot wound; the gun must have been fired
with the muzzle almost touching the back. The shooting-coat, being intact, had
been drawn over the body after death, which must have been instantaneous. The
secret of the poor wretch's death was plain to me in a flash. Some one of the
crater, presumably Gunga Dass, must have shot him with his own gun--the gun
that fitted the brown cartridges. He had never attempted to escape in the face
of the rifle-fire from the boat.

I pushed the corpse out hastily, and saw it sink from sight literally in a few
seconds. I shuddered as I watched. In a dazed, half-conscious way I turned to
peruse the notebook. A stained and discolored slip of paper bad been inserted
between the binding and the back, and dropped out as I opened the pages. This
is what it contained:--"Four out from crow-clump: three left; nine out; two
right; three back; two left; fourteen out; two left; seven out; one left; nine
back; two right; six back; four right; seven back." The paper had been burned
and charred at the edges. What it meant I could not understand. I sat down on
the dried bents turning it over and over between my fingers, until I was aware
of Gunga Dass standing immediately behind me with glowing eyes and
outstretched hands.

"Have you got it?" he panted. "Will you not let me look at it also? I swear
that I will return it."

"Got what?  Return what?" asked.

"That which you have in your hands. It will help us both." He stretched out
his long, bird-like talons, trembling with eagerness.

"I could never find it," he continued. "He had secreted it about his person.
Therefore I shot him, but nevertheless I was unable to obtain it."

Gunga Dass had quite forgotten his little fiction about the rifle-bullet. I
received the information perfectly calmly. Morality is blunted by consorting
with the Dead who are alive.

"What on earth are you raving about? What is it you want me to give you?"

"The piece of paper in the notebook. It will help us both. Oh, you fool! You
fool! Can you not see what it will do for us? We shall escape!"

His voice rose almost to a scream, and he danced with excitement before me. I
own I was moved at the chance of my getting away.

"Don't skip! Explain yourself. Do you mean to say that this slip of paper will
help us? What does it mean?"

"Read it aloud! Read it aloud! I beg and I pray you to read it aloud."

I did so. Gunga Dass listened delightedly, and drew an irregular line in the
sand with his fingers.

"See now! It was the length of his gun-barrels without the stock. I have those
barrels. Four gun-barrels out from the place where I caught crows straight
out; do you follow me? Then three left--Ah! how well I remember when that man
worked it out night after night Then nine out, and so on. Out is always
straight before you across the quicksand. He told me so before I killed him."

"But if you knew all this why didn't you get out before?"

"I did not know it. He told me that he was working it out a year and a half
ago, and how he was working it out night after night when the boat had gone
away, and he could get out near the quicksand safely. Then he said that we
would get away together. But I was afraid that he would leave me behind one
night when he had worked it all out, and so I shot him. Besides, it is not
advisable that the men who once get in here should escape. Only I, and I am a
Brahmin."

The prospect of escape had brought Gunga Dass's caste back to him. He stood
up, walked about and gesticulated violently. Eventually I managed to make him
talk soberly, and he told me how this Englishman had spent six months night
after night in exploring, inch by inch, the passage across the quicksand; how
he had declared it to be simplicity itself up to within about twenty yards of
the river bank after turning the flank of the left horn of the horseshoe. This
much he had evidently not completed when Gunga Dass shot him with his own gun.

In my frenzy of delight at the possibilities of escape I recollect shaking
hands effusively with Gunga Dass, after we had decided that we were to make an
attempt to get away that very night. It was weary work waiting throughout the
afternoon.

About ten o'clock, as far as I could judge, when the Moon had just risen above
the lip of the crater, Gunga Dass made a move for his burrow to bring out the
gun-barrels whereby to measure our path. All the other wretched inhabitants
had retired to their lairs long ago. The guardian boat drifted downstream some
hours before, and we were utterly alone by the crow-clump. Gunga Dass, while
carrying the gun-barrels, let slip the piece of paper which was to be our
guide. I stooped down hastily to recover it, and, as I did so, I was aware
that the diabolical Brahmin was aiming a violent blow at the back of my head
with the gun-barrels. It was too late to turn round. I must have received the
blow somewhere on the nape of my neck. A hundred thousand fiery stars danced
before my eyes, and I fell forwards senseless at the edge of, the quicksand.

When I recovered consciousness, the Moon was going down, and I was sensible of
intolerable pain in the back of my head. Gunga Dass had disappeared and my
mouth was full of blood. I lay down again and prayed that I might die without
more ado. Then the unreasoning fury which I had before mentioned, laid hold
upon me, and I staggered inland toward the walls of the crater. It seemed that
some one was calling to me in a whisper--"Sahib! Sahib! Sahib!" exactly as my
bearer used to call me in the morning I fancied that I was delirious until a
handful of sand fell at my feet. Then I looked up and saw a head peering down
into the amphitheatre--the head of Dunnoo, my dog-boy, who attended to my
collies. As soon as he had attracted my attention, he held up his hand and
showed a rope. I motioned. staggering to and fro for the while, that he should
throw it down. It was a couple of leather punkah-ropes knotted together, with
a loop at one end. I slipped the loop over my head and under my arms; heard
Dunnoo urge something forward; was conscious that I was being dragged, face
downward, up the steep sand slope, and the next instant found myself choked
and half fainting on the sand hills overlooking the crater. Dunnoo, with his
face ashy grey in the moonlight, implored me not to stay but to get back to my
tent at once.

It seems that he had tracked Pornic's footprints fourteen miles across the
sands to the crater; had returned and told my servants, who flatly refused to
meddle with any one, white or black, once fallen into the hideous Village of
the Dead; whereupon Dunnoo had taken one of my ponies and a couple of punkah-
ropes, returned to the crater, and hauled me out as I have described.

To cut a long story short, Dunnoo is now my personal servant on a gold mohur a
month--a sum which I still think far too little for the services he has
rendered. Nothing on earth will induce me to go near that devilish spot again,
or to reveal its whereabouts more clearly than I have done. Of Gunga Dass I
have never found a trace, nor do I wish to do. My sole motive in giving this
to be published is the hope that some one may possibly identify, from the
details and the inventory which I have given above, the corpse of the man in
the olive-green hunting-suit.

 *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

THE MAN WHO WOULD BE KING

 Brother to a Prince and fellow to a beggar if he be found worthy.

 The Law, as quoted, lays down a fair conduct of life, and one not easy to
follow. I have been fellow to a beggar again and again under circumstances
which prevented either of us finding out whether the other was worthy. I have
still to be brother to a Prince, though I once came near to kinship with what
might have been a veritable King, and was promised the reversion of a Kingdom-
-army, law-courts, revenue, and policy all complete. But, today, I greatly
fear that my King is dead, and if I want a crown I must go hunt it for myself.

The beginning of everything was in a railway-train upon the road to Mhow from
Ajmir. There had been a Deficit in the Budget, which necessitated travelling,
not Second-class, which is only half as dear as First-Class, but by
Intermediate, which is very awful indeed. There are no cushions in the
Intermediate class, and the population are either Intermediate, which is
Eurasian, or native, which for a long night journey is nasty, or Loafer, which
is amusing though intoxicated. Intermediates do not buy from refreshment-
rooms. They carry their food in bundles and pots, and buy sweets from the
native sweetmeat-sellers, and drink the roadside water. This is why in hot
weather Intermediates are taken out of the carriages dead, and in all weathers
are most properly looked down upon.

My particular Intermediate happened to be empty till I reached Nasirabad, when
the big black-browed gentleman in shirt-sleeves entered, and, following the
custom of Intermediates, passed the time of day. He was a wanderer and a
vagabond like myself, but with an educated taste for whisky. He told tales of
things he had seen and done, of out-of-the-way corners of the Empire into
which he had penetrated, and of adventures in which he risked his life for a
few days' food.

"If India was filled with men like you and me, not knowing more than the crows
where they'd get their next day's rations, it isn't seventy millions of
revenue the land would be paying--it's seven hundred millions," said he; and
as I looked at his mouth and chin I was disposed to agree with him.

We talked politics,--the politics of Loaferdom that sees things from the under
side where the lath and plaster is not smoothed off,--and we talked postal
arrangements because my friend wanted to send a telegram back from the next
station to Ajmir, the turning-off place from the Bombay to the Mhow line as
you travel westward. My friend had no money beyond eight annas which he wanted
for dinner, and I had no money at all, owing to the hitch in the Budget before
mentioned. Further, I was going into a wilderness where, though I should
resume touch with the Treasury, there were no telegraph offices. I was,
therefore, unable to help him in any way.

"We might threaten a Station-master, and make him send a wire on tick," said
my friend, "but that'd mean inquiries for you and for me, and I've got my
hands full these days. Did you say you were travelling back along this line
within any days?"

"Within ten," I said.

"Can't you make it eight?" said he. "Mine is rather urgent business."

"I can send your telegrams within ten days if that will serve you," I said.

"I couldn't trust the wire to fetch him, now I think of it. It's this way. He
leaves Delhi on the 23rd for Bombay. That means he'll be running through Ajmir
about the night of the 23rd."

"But I'm going into the Indian Desert," I explained.

"Well and good," said he. "You'll be changing at Marwar Junction to get into
Jodhpore territory,--you must do that,--and he'll be coming through Marwar
Junction in the early morning of the 24th by the Bombay Mail. Can you be at
Marwar Junction on that time? 'T won't be inconveniencing you, because I know
that there's precious few pickings to be got out of these Central India
States--even though you pretend to be correspondent of the 'Backwoodsman.' "

"Have you ever tried that trick?" I asked.

"Again and again, but the Residents find you out, and then you get escorted to
the Border before you've time to get your knife into them. But about my friend
here. I must give him a word o' mouth to tell him what's come to me, or else
he won't know where to go. I would take it more than kind of you if you was to
come out of Central India in time to catch him at Marwar Junction, and say to
him, 'He has gone South for the week.' He'll know what that means. He's a big
man with a red beard, and a great swell he is.

You'll find him sleeping like a gentleman with all his luggage round him in a
Second-class apartment. But don't you be afraid.

Slip down the window and say, 'He has gone South for the week,' and he'll
tumble. It's only cutting your time of stay in those parts by two days. I ask
you as a stranger--going to the West," he said, with emphasis.

"Where have you come from?" said I.

"From the East," said he, "and I am hoping that you will give him the message
on the square--for the sake of my Mother as well as your own."

Englishmen are not usually softened by appeals to the memory of their mothers;
but for certain reasons, which will be fully apparent, I saw fit to agree.

"It's more than a little matter," said he, "and that's why I asked you to do
it--and now I know that I can depend on you doing it. A Second-class carriage
at Marwar Junction, and a red-haired man asleep in it. You'll be sure to
remember. I get out at the next station, and I must hold on there till he
comes or sends me what I want."

"I'll give the message if I catch him," I said, "and for the sake of your
Mother as well as mine I'll give you a word of advice. Don't try to run the
Central India States just now as the correspondent of the 'Backwoodsman.'
There's a real one knocking about here, and it might lead to trouble."

"Thank you," said he, simply; "and when will the swine be gone? I can't starve
because he's ruining my work. I wanted to get hold of the Degumber Rajah down
here about his father's widow, and give him a jump."

"What did he do to his father's widow, then?"

"Filled her up with red pepper and slippered her to death as she hung from a
beam. I found that out myself, and I'm the only man that would dare going into
the State to get hush-money for it. They'll try to poison me, same as they did
in Chortumna when I went on the loot there. But you'll give the man at Marwar
Junction my message?"

He got out at a little roadside station, and I reflected. I had heard, more
than once, of men personating correspondents of newspapers and bleeding small
Native States with threats of exposure, but I had never met any of the caste
before. They lead a hard life, and generally die with great suddenness. The
Native States have a wholesome horror of English newspapers, which may throw
light on their peculiar methods of government, and do their best to choke
correspondents with champagne, or drive them out of their mind with four-in-
hand barouches. They do not understand that nobody cares a straw for the
internal administration of Native States so long as oppression and crime are
kept within decent limits, and the ruler is not drugged, drunk, or diseased
from one end of the year to the other. They are the dark places of the earth,
full of unimaginable cruelty, touching the Railway and the Telegraph on one
side, and, on the other, the days of Harun-al-Raschid. When I left the train I
did business with divers Kings, and in eight days passed through many changes
of life. Sometimes I wore dress-clothes and consorted with Princes and
Politicals, drinking from crystal and eating from silver. Sometimes I lay out
upon the ground and devoured what I could get, from a plate made of leaves,
and drank the running water, and slept under the same rug as my servant. It
was all in the day's work.

Then I headed for the Great Indian Desert upon the proper date, as I had
promised, and the night Mail set me down at Marwar Junction, where a funny
little, happy-go-lucky, native managed railway runs to Jodhpore. The Bombay
Mail from Delhi makes a short halt at Marwar. She arrived just as I got in,
and I had just time to hurry to her platform and go down the carriages. There
was only one Second-class on the train. I slipped the window and looked down
upon a flaming-red beard, half covered by a railway-rug. That was my man, fast
asleep, and I dug him gently in the ribs.

He woke with a grunt, and I saw his face in the light of the lamps.

It was a great and shining face.

"Tickets again?" said he.

"No," said I. "I am to tell you that he is gone South for the week. He has
gone South for the week!"

The train had begun to move out. The red man rubbed his eyes.

"He has gone South for the week," he repeated. "Now that's just like his
impidence. Did he say that I was to give you anything? 'Cause I won't."

"He didn't," I said, and dropped away, and watched the red lights die out in
the dark. It was horribly cold because the wind was blowing off the sands. I
climbed into my own train--not an Intermediate carriage this time--and went to
sleep.

If the man with the beard had given me a rupee I should have kept it as a
memento of a rather curious affair. But the consciousness of having done my
duty was my only reward.

Later on I reflected that two gentlemen like my friends could not do any good
if they foregathered and personated correspondents of newspapers, and might,
if they blackmailed one of the little rat-trap States of Central India or
Southern Rajputana, get themselves into serious difficulties. I therefore took
some trouble to describe them as accurately as I could remember to people who
would be interested in deporting them; and succeeded, so I was later informed,
in having them headed back from the Degumber borders.

Then I became respectable, and returned to an office where there were no Kings
and no incidents outside the daily manufacture of a newspaper. A newspaper
office seems to attract every conceivable sort of person, to the prejudice of
discipline. Zenana-mission ladies arrive, and beg that the Editor will
instantly abandon all his duties to describe a Christian prize-giving in a
back slum of a perfectly inaccessible village; Colonels who have been
overpassed for command sit down and sketch the outline of a series of ten,
twelve, or twenty- four leading articles on Seniority versus Selection;
missionaries wish to know why they have not been permitted to escape from
their regular vehicles of abuse, and swear at a brother missionary under
special patronage of the editorial We. Stranded theatrical companies troop up
to explain that they cannot pay for their advertisements, but on their return
from New Zealand or Tahiti will do so with interest; inventors of patent
punka-pulling machines, carriage couplings, and unbreakable swords and
axletrees call with specifications in their pockets and hours at their
disposal; tea companies enter and elaborate their prospectuses with the office
pens; secretaries of ball committees clamour to have the glories of their last
dance more fully described; strange ladies rustle in and say, "I want a
hundred lady's cards printed at once, please," which is manifestly part of an
Editor's duty; and every dissolute ruffian that ever tramped the Grand Trunk
Road makes it his business to ask for employment as a proof-reader. And, all
the time, the telephone-bell is ringing madly, and Kings are being killed on
the Continent, and Empires are saying, "You're another," and Mister Gladstone
is calling down brimstone upon the British Dominions, and the little black
copyboys are whining, "kaa-pi chay-ha-yeh" ("Copy wanted"), like tired bees,
and most of the paper is as blank as Modred's shield.

But that is the amusing part of the year. There are six other months when none
ever come to call, and the thermometer walks inch by inch up to the top of the
glass, and the office is darkened to just above reading-light, and the press-
machines are red-hot to touch, and nobody writes anything but accounts of
amusements in the Hill-stations or obituary notices. Then the telephone
becomes a tinkling terror, because it tells you of the sudden deaths of men
and women that you knew intimately, and the prickly heat covers you with a
garment, and you sit down and write: "A slight increase of sickness is
reported from the Khuda Janta Khan District. The outbreak is purely sporadic
in its nature, and, thanks to the energetic efforts of the District
authorities, is now almost at an end. It is, however, with deep regret we
record the death," etc.

Then the sickness really breaks out, and the less recording and reporting the
better for the peace of the subscribers. But the Empires and the Kings
continue to divert themselves as selfishly as before, and the Foreman thinks
that a daily paper really ought to come out once in twenty-four hours, and all
the people at the Hill-stations in the middle of their amusements say, "Good
gracious! why can't the paper be sparkling? I'm sure there's plenty going on
up here."

That is the dark half of the moon, and, as the advertisements say, "must be
experienced to be appreciated."

It was in that season, and a remarkably evil season, that the paper began
running the last issue of the week on Saturday night, which is to say Sunday
morning, after the custom of a London paper. This was a great convenience, for
immediately after the paper was put to bed the dawn would lower the
thermometer from 96 degrees to almost 84 degrees for half an hour, and in that
chill--you have no idea how cold is 84 degrees on the grass until you begin to
pray for it--a very tired man could get off to sleep ere the heat roused him.

One Saturday night it was my pleasant duty to put the paper to bed alone. A
King or courtier or a courtesan or a Community was going to die or get a new
Constitution, or do something that was important on the other side of the
world, and the paper was to be held open till the latest possible minute in
order to catch the telegram.

It was a pitchy-black night, as stifling as a June night can be, and the loo,
the red-hot wind from the westward, was booming among the tinder-dry trees and
pretending that the rain was on its heels.

Now and again a spot of almost boiling water would fall on the dust with the
flop of a frog, but all our weary world knew that was only pretence. It was a
shade cooler in the press-room than the office, so I sat there, while the type
ticked and clicked, and the night-jars hooted at the windows, and the all but
naked compositors wiped the sweat from their foreheads and called for water.
The thing that was keeping us back, whatever it was, would not come off,
though the loo dropped and the last type was set, and the whole round earth
stood still in the choking heat, with its finger on its lip, to wait the
event. I drowsed, and wondered whether the telegraph was a blessing, and
whether this dying man, or struggling people, might be aware of the
inconvenience the delay was causing. There was no special reason beyond the
heat and worry to make tension, but, as the clock-hands crept up to three
o'clock and the machines spun their fly-wheels two and three times to see that
all was in order, before I said the word that would set them off, I could have
shrieked aloud.

Then the roar and rattle of the wheels shivered the quiet into little bits. I
rose to go away, but two men in white clothes stood in front of me. The first
one said, "It's him!" The second said, "So it is!" And they both laughed
almost as loudly as the machinery roared, and mopped their foreheads. "We seed
there was a light burning across the road, and we were sleeping in that ditch
there for coolness, and I said to my friend here, "The office is open. Let's
come along and speak to him as turned us back from Degumber State," said the
smaller of the two. He was the man I had met in the Mhow train, and his fellow
was the red-bearded man of Marwar Junction. There was no mistaking the
eyebrows of the one or the beard of the other.

I was not pleased, because I wished to go to sleep, not to squabble with
loafers. "What do you want?" I asked.

"Half an hour's talk with you, cool and comfortable, in the office," said the
red-bearded man. "We'd like some drink,--the Contrack doesn't begin yet,
Peachey, so you needn't look,--but what we really want is advice. We don't
want money. We ask you as a favour, because we found out you did us a bad turn
about Degumber State."

I led from the press-room to the stifling office with the maps on the walls,
and the red-haired man rubbed his hands. "That's something like," said he.
"This was the proper shop to come to.

"Now, Sir, let me introduce you to Brother Peachey Carnehan, that's him, and
Brother Daniel Dravot, that is me, and the less said about our professions the
better, for we have been most things in our time--soldier, sailor, compositor,
photographer, proof-reader, street-preacher, and correspondents of the
'Backwoodsman' when we thought the paper wanted one. Carnehan is sober, and so
am I. Look at us first, and see that's sure. It will save you cutting into my
talk. We'll take one of your cigars apiece, and you shall see us light up."

I watched the test. The men were absolutely sober, so I gave them each a tepid
whisky-and-soda.

"Well and good," said Carnehan of the eyebrows, wiping the froth from his
moustache. "Let me talk now, Dan. We have been all over India, mostly on foot.
We have been boiler-fitters, engine-drivers, petty contractors, and all that,
and we have decided that India isn't big enough for such as us."

They certainly were too big for the office. Dravot's beard seemed to fill half
the room and Carnehan's shoulders the other half, as they sat on the big
table. Carnehan continued: "The country isn't half worked out because they
that governs it won't let you touch it. They spend all their blessed time in
governing it, and you can't lift a spade, nor chip a rock, nor look for oil,
nor anything like that, without all the Government saying, 'Leave it alone,
and let us govern.' Therefore, such as it is, we will let it alone, and go
away to some other place where a man isn't crowded and can come to his own. We
are not little men, and there is nothing that we are afraid of except Drink,
and we have signed a Contrack on that.

Therefore we are going away to be Kings."

"Kings in our own right," muttered Dravot.

"Yes, of course," I said. "You've been tramping in the sun, and it's a very
warm night, and hadn't you better sleep over the notion? Come tomorrow."

"Neither drunk nor sunstruck," said Dravot. "We have slept over the notion
half a year, and require to see Books and Atlases, and we have decided that
there is only one place now in the world that two strong men can Sar-a-whack.
They call it Kafiristan. By my reckoning it's the top right-hand corner of
Afghanistan, not more than three hundred miles from Peshawar. They have two
and thirty heathen idols there, and we'll be the thirty-third and fourth. It's
a mountaineous country, the women of those parts are very beautiful."

"But that is provided against in the Contrack," said Carnehan. "Neither Women
nor Liquor, Daniel."

"And that's all we know, except that no one has gone there, and they fight,
and in any place where they fight a man who knows how to drill men can always
be a King. We shall go to those parts and say to any King we find, 'D' you
want to vanquish your foes?' and we will show him how to drill men; for that
we know better than anything else. Then we will subvert that King and seize
his Throne and establish a Dy-nasty."

"You'll be cut to pieces before you're fifty miles across the Border," I said.
"You have to travel through Afghanistan to get to that country. It's one mass
of mountains and peaks and glaciers, and no Englishman has been through it.
The people are utter brutes, and even if you reached them you couldn't do
anything."

"That's more like," said Carnehan. "If you could think us a little more mad we
would be more pleased. We have come to you to know about this country, to read
a book about it, and to be shown maps. We want you to tell us that we are
fools and to show us your books." He turned to the bookcases.

"Are you at all in earnest?" I said.

"A little," said Dravot, sweetly. "As big a map as you have got, even if it's
all blank where Kafiristan is, and any books you've got. We can read, though
we aren't very educated."

I uncased the big thirty-two-miles-to-the-inch map of India and two smaller
Frontier maps, hauled down volume INF-KAN of the "Encyclopaedia Britannica,"
and the men consulted them.

"See here!" said Dravot, his thumb on the map. "Up to Jagdallak, Peachey and
me know the road. We was there with Robert's Army. We'll have to turn off to
the right at Jagdallak through Laghmann territory. Then we get among the
hills--fourteen thousand feet--fifteen thousand--it will be cold work there,
but it don't look very far on the map."

I handed him Wood on the "Sources of the Oxus." Carnehan was deep in the
"Encyclopaedia."

"They're a mixed lot," said Dravot, reflectively; "and it won't help us to
know the names of their tribes. The more tribes the more they'll fight, and
the better for us. From Jagdallak to Ashang. H'mm!"

"But all the information about the country is as sketchy and inaccurate as can
be," I protested. "No one knows anything about it really. Here's the file of
the 'United Services' Institute.' Read what Bellew says."

"Blow Bellew!" said Carnehan. "Dan, they're a stinkin' lot of heathens, but
this book here says they think they're related to us English."

I smoked while the men poured over Raverty, Wood, the maps, and the
"Encyclopaedia."

"There is no use your waiting," said Dravot, politely. "It's about four
o'clock now. We'll go before six o'clock if you want to sleep, and we won't
steal any of the papers. Don't you sit up. We're two harmless lunatics, and if
you come tomorrow evening down to the Serai we'll say goodbye to you."

"You are two fools," I answered. "You'll be turned back at the Frontier or cut
up the minute you set foot in Afghanistan. Do you want any money or a
recommendation down-country? I can help you to the chance of work next week."

"Next week we shall be hard at work ourselves, thank you," said Dravot. "It
isn't so easy being a King as it looks. When we've got our Kingdom in going
order we'll let you know, and you can come up and help us govern it."

"Would two lunatics make a Contrack like that?" said Carnehan, with subdued
pride, showing me a greasy half-sheet of notepaper on which was written the
following. I copied it, then and there, as a curiosity.

 This Contrack between me and you persuing witnesseth in  the name of God--
Amen and so forth.

  (One) That me and you will settle this matter together; i.e., to be Kings of
Kafiristan.

  (Two)That you and me will not, while this matter is being settled, look at
any Liquor, nor any Woman, black, white,        or brown, so as to get mixed
up with one or the other harmful.

  (Three) That we conduct ourselves with Dignity and Discretion, and if one of
us gets into trouble the other will stay by him.

   Signed by you and me this day.

     Peachey Taliaferro Carnehan.

     Daniel Dravot.

   Both Gentlemen at Large.

"There was no need for the last article," said Carnehan, blushing modestly;
"but it looks regular. Now you know the sort of men that loafers are,--we are
loafers, Dan, until we get out of India,--and do you think that we would sign
a Contrack like that unless we was in earnest? We have kept away from the two
things that make life worth having."

"You won't enjoy your lives much longer if you are going to try this idiotic
adventure. Don't set the office on fire," I said, "and go away before nine
o'clock."

I left them still poring over the maps and making notes on the back of the
"Contrack." "Be sure to come down to the Serai tomorrow," were their parting
words.

The Kumharsen Serai is the great foursquare sink of humanity where the strings
of camels and horses from the North load and unload. All the nationalities of
Central Asia may be found there, and most of the folk of India proper. Balkh
and Bokhara there meet Bengal and Bombay, and try to draw eye-teeth. You can
buy ponies, turquoises, Persian pussy-cats, saddle-bags, fat-tailed sheep, and
musk in the Kumharsen Serai, and get many strange things for nothing. In the
afternoon I went down to see whether my friends intended to keep their word or
were lying there drunk.

A priest attired in fragments of ribbons and rags stalked up to me, gravely
twisting a child's paper whirligig. Behind him was his servant bending under
the load of a crate of mud toys. The two were loading up two camels, and the
inhabitants of the Serai watched them with shrieks of laughter.

"The priest is mad," said a horse-dealer to me. "He is going up to Kabul to
sell toys to the Amir. He will either be raised to honour or have his head cut
off. He came in here this morning and has been behaving madly ever since."

"The witless are under the protection of God," stammered a flat-cheeked Usbeg
in broken Hindi. "They foretell future events."

"Would they could have foretold that my caravan would have been cut up by the
Shinwaris almost within shadow of the Pass!" grunted the Eusufzai agent of a
Rajputana trading-house whose goods had been diverted into the hands of other
robbers just across the Border, and whose misfortunes were the laughing-stock
of the bazaar. "Ohe', priest, whence come you and whither do you go?"

"From Roum have I come," shouted the priest, waving his whirligig; "from Roum,
blown by the breath of a hundred devils across the sea! O thieves, robbers,
liars, the blessing of Pir Khan on pigs, dogs, and perjurers! Who will take
the Protected of God to the North to sell charms that are never still to the
Amir? The camels shall not gall, the sons shall not fall sick, and the wives
shall remain faithful while they are away, of the men who give me place in
their caravan. Who will assist me to slipper the King of the Roos with a
golden slipper with a silver heel? The protection of Pir Khan be upon his
labours!" He spread out the skirts of his gabardine and pirouetted between the
lines of tethered horses.

"There starts a caravan from Peshawar to Kabul in twenty days, Huzrut," said
the Eusufzai trader. "My camels go therewith. Do thou also go and bring us
good luck."

"I will go even now!" shouted the priest. "I will depart upon my winged
camels, and be at Peshawar in a day! Ho! Hazar Mir Khan," he yelled to his
servant, "drive out the camels, but let me first mount my own."

He leaped on the back of his beast as it knelt, and, turning round to me,
cried, "Come thou also, Sahib, a little along the road, and I will sell thee a
charm--an amulet that shall make thee King of Kafiristan."

Then the light broke upon me, and I followed the two camels out of the Serai
till we reached open road and the priest halted.

"What d' you think o' that?" said he in English. "Carnehan can't talk their
patter, so I've made him my servant. He makes a handsome servant. 'T isn't for
nothing that I've been knocking about the country for fourteen years. Didn't I
do that talk neat? We'll hitch on to a caravan at Peshawar till we get to
Jagdallak, and then we'll see if we can get donkeys for our camels, and strike
into Kafiristan. Whirligigs for the Amir, O Lor'! Put your hand under the
camelbags and tell me what you feel."

I felt the butt of a Martini, and another and another.

"Twenty of 'em," said Dravot, placidly. "Twenty of 'em and ammunition to
correspond, under the whirligigs and the mud dolls."

"Heaven help you if you are caught with those things!" I said. "A Martini is
worth her weight in silver among the Pathans."

"Fifteen hundred rupees of capital--every rupee we could beg, borrow, or
steal--are invested on these two camels," said Dravot.

"We won't get caught. We're going through the Khaiber with a regular caravan.
Who'd touch a poor mad priest?"

"Have you got everything you want?" I asked, overcome with astonishment.

"Not yet, but we shall soon. Give us a memento of your kindness, Brother. You
did me a service yesterday, and that time in Marwar. Half my Kingdom shall you
have, as the saying is." I slipped a small charm compass from my watch-chain
and handed it up to the priest.

"Goodbye," said Dravot, giving me hand cautiously. "It's the last time we'll
shake hands with an Englishman these many days. Shake hands with him,
Carnehan," he cried, as the second camel passed me.

Carnehan leaned down and shook hands. Then the camels passed away along the
dusty road, and I was left alone to wonder. My eye could detect no failure in
the disguises. The scene in the Serai proved that they were complete to the
native mind. There was just the chance, therefore, that Carnehan and Dravot
would be able to wander through Afghanistan without detection. But, beyond,
they would find death--certain and awful death.

Ten days later a native correspondent, giving me the news of the day from
Peshawar, wound up his letter with: "There has been much laughter here on
account of a certain mad priest who is going in his estimation to sell petty
gauds and insignificant trinkets which he ascribes as great charms to H. H.
the Amir of Bokhara. He passed through Peshawar and associated himself to the
Second Summer caravan that goes to Kabul. The merchants are pleased because
through superstition they imagine that such mad fellows bring good fortune."

The two, then, were beyond the Border. I would have prayed for them, but that
night a real King died in Europe, and demanded an obituary notice.

The wheel of the world swings through the same phases again and again. Summer
passed and winter thereafter, and came and passed again. The daily paper
continued and I with it, and upon the third summer there fell a hot night, a
night issue, and a strained waiting for something to be telegraphed from the
other side of the world, exactly as had happened before. A few great men had
died in the past two years, the machines worked with more clatter, and some of
the trees in the office garden were a few feet taller. But that was all the
difference.

I passed over to the press-room, and went through just such a scene as I have
already described. The nervous tension was stronger than it had been two years
before, and I felt the heat more acutely. At three o'clock I cried, "Print
off," and turned to go, when there crept to my chair what was left of a man.
He was bent into a circle, his head was sunk between his shoulders, and he
moved his feet one over the other like a bear. I could hardly see whether he
walked or crawled--this rag-wrapped, whining cripple who addressed me by name,
crying that he was come back. "Can you give me a drink?" he whimpered. "For
the Lord's sake, give me a drink!"

I went back to the office, the man following with groans of pain, and I turned
up the lamp.

"Don't you know me?" he gasped, dropping into a chair, and he turned his drawn
face, surmounted by a shock of gray hair, to the light.

I looked at him intently. Once before had I seen eyebrows that met over the
nose in an inch-broad black band, but for the life of me I could not tell
where.

"I don't know you," I said, handing him the whisky. "What can I do for you?"

He took a gulp of the spirit raw, and shivered in spite of the suffocating
heat.

"I've come back," he repeated; "and I was the King of Kafiristan--me and
Dravot--crowned Kings we was! In this office we settled it--you setting there
and giving us the books. I am Peachey,--Peachey Taliaferro Carnehan,--and
you've been setting here ever since--O Lord!"

I was more than a little astonished, and expressed my feelings accordingly.

"It's true," said Carnehan, with a dry cackle, nursing his feet, which were
wrapped in rags--"true as gospel. Kings we were, with crowns upon our heads--
me and Dravot--poor Dan--oh, poor, poor Dan, that would never take advice, not
though I begged of him!"

"Take the whisky," I said, "and take your own time. Tell me all you can
recollect of everything from beginning to end. You got across the Border on
your camels, Dravot dressed as a mad priest and you his servant. Do you
remember that?"

"I ain't mad--yet, but I shall be that way soon. Of course I remember. Keep
looking at me, or maybe my words will go all to pieces. Keep looking at me in
my eyes and don't say anything."

I leaned forward and looked into his face as steadily as I could. He dropped
one hand upon the table and I grasped it by the wrist. It was twisted like a
bird's claw, and upon the back was a ragged, red, diamond-shaped scar.

"No, don't look there. Look at me," said Carnehan. "That comes afterward, but
for the Lord's sake don't distrack me. We left with that caravan, me and
Dravot playing all sorts of antics to amuse the people we were with. Dravot
used to make us laugh in the evenings when all the people was cooking their
dinners--cooking their dinners, and . . . what did they do then? They lit
little fires with sparks that went into Dravot's beard, and we all laughed--
fit to die. Little red fires they was, going into Dravot's big red beard--so
funny." His eyes left mine and he smiled foolishly.

"You went as far as Jagdallak with that caravan," I said, at a venture, "after
you had lit those fires. To Jagdallak, where you turned off to try to get into
Kafiristan."

"No, we didn't, neither. What are you talking about? We turned off before
Jagdallak, because we heard the roads was good. But they wasn't good enough
for our two camels--mine and Dravot's. When we left the caravan, Dravot took
off all his clothes and mine too, and said we would be heathen, because the
Kafirs didn't allow Mohammedans to talk to them. So we dressed betwixt and
between, and such a sight as Daniel Dravot I never saw yet nor expect to see
again. He burned half his beard, and slung a sheepskin over his shoulder, and
shaved his head into patterns. He shaved mine too, and made me wear outrageous
things to look like a heathen. That was in a most mountaineous country, and
our camels couldn't go along any more because of the mountains. They were tall
and black, and coming home I saw them fight like wild goats--there are lots of
goats in Kafiristan. And these mountains, they never keep still, no more than
the goats. Always fighting they are, and don't let you sleep at night."

"Take some more whisky," I said, very slowly. "What did you and Daniel Dravot
do when the camels could go no farther because of the rough roads that led
into Kafiristan?"

"What did which do? There was a party called Peachey Taliaferro Carnehan that
was with Dravot. Shall I tell you about him? He died out there in the cold.
Slap from the bridge fell old Peachey, turning and twisting in the air like a
penny whirligig that you can sell to the Amir. No; they was two for three
ha'pence, those whirligigs, or I am much mistaken and woful sore... And then
these camels were no use, and Peachey said to Dravot, 'For the Lord's sake
let's get out of this before our heads are chopped off,' and with that they
killed the camels all among the mountains, not having anything in particular
to eat, but first they took off the boxes with the guns and the ammunition,
till two men came along driving four mules. Dravot up and dances in front of
them, singing, 'Sell me four mules.' Says the first man, 'If you are rich
enough to buy, you are rich enough to rob;' but before ever he could put his
hand to his knife, Dravot breaks his neck over his knee, and the other party
runs away. So Carnehan loaded the mules with the rifles that was taken off the
camels, and together we starts forward into those bitter-cold mountaineous
parts, and never a road broader than the back of your hand."

He paused for a moment, while I asked him if he could remember the nature of
the country through which he had journeyed.

"I am telling you as straight as I can, but my head isn't as good as it might
be. They drove nails through it to make me hear better how Dravot died. The
country was mountaineous and the mules were most contrary, and the inhabitants
was dispersed and solitary. They went up and up, and down and down, and that
other party, Carnehan, was imploring of Dravot not to sing and whistle so
loud, for fear of bringing down the tremenjus avalanches. But Dravot says that
if a King couldn't sing it wasn't worth being King, and whacked the mules over
the rump, and never took no heed for ten cold days. We came to a big level
valley all among the mountains, and the mules were near dead, so we killed
them, not having anything in special for them or us to eat. We sat upon the
boxes, and played odd and even with the cartridges that was jolted out.

"Then ten men with bows and arrows ran down that valley, chasing twenty men
with bows and arrows, and the row was tremenjus.

"They was fair men--fairer than you or me--with yellow hair and remarkable
well built. Says Dravot, unpacking the guns, 'This is the beginning of the
business. We'll fight for the ten men,' and with that he fires two rifles at
the twenty men, and drops one of them at two hundred yards from the rock where
he was sitting. The other men began to run, but Carnehan and Dravot sits on
the boxes picking them off at all ranges, up and down the valley. Then we goes
up to the ten men that had run across the snow too, and they fires a footy
little arrow at us. Dravot he shoots above their heads, and they all falls
down flat. Then he walks over them and kicks them, and then he lifts them up
and shakes hands all round to make them friendly like. He calls them and gives
them the boxes to carry, and waves his hand for all the world as though he was
King already. They takes the boxes and him across the valley and up the hill
into a pine wood on the top, where there was half a dozen big stone idols.
Dravot he goes to the biggest--a fellow they call Imbra--and lays a rifle and
a cartridge at his feet, rubbing his nose respectfully with his own nose,
patting him on the head, and nods his head, and says, 'That's all right. I'm
in the know too, and these old jimjams are my friends.' Then he opens his
mouth and points down it, and when the first man brings him food, he says,
'No;' and when the second man brings him food, he says 'no;' but when one of
the old priests and the boss of the village brings him food, he says, 'Yes;'
very haughty, and eats it slow. That was how he came to our first village
without any trouble, just as though we had tumbled from the skies. But we
tumbled from one of those damned rope-bridges, you see, and--you couldn't
expect a man to laugh much after that?"

"Take some more whisky and go on," I said. "That was the first village you
came into. How did you get to be King?"

"I wasn't King," said Carnehan. "Dravot he was the King, and a handsome man he
looked with the gold crown on his head and all. Him and the other party stayed
in that village, and every morning Dravot sat by the side of old Imbra, and
the people came and worshipped. That was Dravot's order. Then a lot of men
came into the valley, and Carnehan Dravot picks them off with the rifles
before they knew where they was, and runs down into the valley and up again
the other side, and finds another village, same as the first one, and the
people all falls down flat on their faces, and Dravot says, 'Now what is the
trouble between you two villages?' and the people points to a woman, as fair
as you or me, that was carried off, and Dravot takes her back to the first
village and counts up the dead--eight there was. For each dead man Dravot
pours a little milk on the ground and waves his arms like a whirligig, and
'That's all right,' says he. Then he and Carnehan takes the big boss of each
village by the arm, and walks them down the valley, and shows them how to
scratch a line with a spear right down the valley, and gives each a sod of
turf from both sides of the line. Then all the people comes down and shouts
like the devil and all, and Dravot says, 'Go and dig the land, and be fruitful
and multiply,' which they did, though they didn't understand. Then we asks the
names of things in their lingo--bread and water and fire and idols and such;
and Dravot leads the priest of each village up to the idol, and says he must
sit there and judge the people, and if anything goes wrong he is to be shot.

"Next week they was all turning up the land in the valley as quiet as bees and
much prettier, and the priests heard all the complaints and told Dravot in
dumb-show what it was about. 'That's just the beginning,' says Dravot. 'They
think we're Gods.' He and Carnehan picks out twenty good men and shows them
how to click off a rifle and form fours and advance in line; and they was very
pleased to do so, and clever to see the hang of it. Then he takes out his pipe
and his baccy-pouch, and leaves one at one village and one at the other, and
off we two goes to see what was to be done in the next valley. That was all
rock, and there was a little village there, and Carnehan says, 'Send 'em to
the old valley to plant,' and takes 'em there and gives 'em some land that
wasn't took before. They were a poor lot, and we blooded 'em with a kid before
letting 'em into the new Kingdom. That was to impress the people, and then
they settled down quiet, and Carnehan went back to Dravot, who had got into
another valley, all snow and ice and most mountaineous.

"There was no people there, and the Army got afraid; so Dravot shoots one of
them, and goes on till he finds some people in a village, and the Army
explains that unless the people wants to be killed they had better not shoot
their little matchlocks, for they had matchlocks. We makes friends with the
priest, and I stays there alone with two of the Army, teaching the men how to
drill; and a thundering big Chief comes across the snow with kettledrums and
horns twanging, because he heard there was a new God kicking about. Carnehan
sights for the brown of the men half a mile across the snow and wings one of
them. Then he sends a message to the Chief that, unless he wished to be
killed, he must come and shake hands with me and leave his arms behind. The
Chief comes alone first, and Carnehan shakes hands with him and whirls his
arms about, same as Dravot used, and very much surprised that Chief was, and
strokes my eyebrows. Then Carnehan goes alone to the Chief, and asks him in
dumb-show if he had an enemy he hated. 'I have,' says the chief. So Carnehan
weeds out the pick of his men, and sets the two of the Army to show them
drill, and at the end of two weeks the men can manoeuvre about as well as
Volunteers. So he marches with the Chief to a great big plain on the top of a
mountain, and the Chief's men rushes into a village and takes it, we three
Martinis firing into the brown of the enemy. So we took that village too, and
I gives the Chief a rag from my coat, and says, 'Occupy till I come;' which
was scriptural. By way of a reminder, when me and the Army was eighteen
hundred yards away, I drops a bullet near him standing on the snow, and all
the people falls flat on their faces. Then I sends a letter to Dravot wherever
he be by land or by sea."

At the risk of throwing the creature out of train I interrupted: "How could
you write a letter up yonder?"

"The letter?--oh!--the letter! Keep looking at me between the eyes, please. It
was a string-talk letter, that we'd learned the way of it from a blind beggar
in the Punjab."

I remember that there had once come to the office a blind man with a knotted
twig, and a piece of string which he wound round the twig according to some
cipher of his own. He could, after the lapse of days or hours, repeat the
sentence which he had reeled up.

He had reduced the alphabet to eleven primitive sounds, and tried to teach me
his method, but I could not understand.

"I sent that letter to Dravot," said Carnehan, "and told him to come back
because this Kingdom was growing too big for me to handle; and then I struck
for the first valley, to see how the priests were working. They called the
village we took along with the Chief, Bashkai, and the first village we took,
Er-Heb. The priests at Er-Heb was doing all right, but they had a lot of
pending cases about land to show me, and some men from another village had
been firing arrows at night. I went out and looked for that village, and fired
four rounds at it from a thousand yards. That used all the cartridges I cared
to spend, and I waited for Dravot, who had been away two or three months, and
I kept my people quiet.

"One morning I heard the devil's own noise of drums and horns, and Dan Dravot
marches down the hill with his Army and a tail of hundreds of men, and, which
was the most amazing, a great gold crown on his head. 'My Gord, Carnehan,'
says Daniel, 'this is a tremenjus business, and we've got the whole country as
far as it's worth having. I am the son of Alexander by Queen Semiramis, and
you're my younger brother and a God too! It's the biggest thing we've ever
seen. I've been marching and fighting for six weeks with the Army, and every
footy little village for fifty miles has come in rejoiceful; and more than
that, I've got the key of the whole show, as you'll see, and I've got a crown
for you! I told 'em to make two of 'em at a place called Shu, where the gold
lies in the rock like suet in mutton. Gold I've seen, and turquoise I've
kicked out of the cliffs, and there's garnets in the sands of the river, and
here's a chunk of amber that a man brought me. Call up all the priests and,
here, take your crown.'

"One of the men opens a black hair bag, and I slips the crown on. It was too
small and too heavy, but I wore it for the glory. Hammered gold it was--five
pounds weight, like a hoop of a barrel.

"'Peachey,' says Dravot, 'we don't want to fight no more. The Craft's the
trick, so help me!' and he brings forward that same Chief that I left at
Bashkai--Billy Fish we called him afterward, because he was so like Billy Fish
that drove the big tank-engine at Mach on the Bolan in the old days. 'Shake
hands with him,' says Dravot; and I shook hands and nearly dropped, for Billy
Fish gave me the Grip. I said nothing, but tried him with the Fellow-craft
Grip. He answers all right, and I tried the Master's Grip, but that was a
slip. 'A Fellow-craft he is!' I says to Dan. 'Does he know the word?' 'He
does,' says Dan, 'and all the priests know. It's a miracle! The Chiefs and the
priests can work a Fellow-craft Lodge in a way that's very like ours, and
they've cut the marks on the rocks, but they don't know the Third Degree, and
they've come to find out. It's Gord's Truth. I've known these long years that
the Afghans knew up to the Fellow-craft Degree, but this is a miracle. A God
and a Grand Master of the Craft am I, and a Lodge in the Third Degree I will
open, and we'll raise the head priests and the Chiefs of the villages.'

"'It's against all the law,' I says, 'holding a Lodge without warrant from any
one; and you know we never held office in any Lodge.'

"'It's a master stroke o' policy,' says Dravot. 'It means running the country
as easy as a four-wheeled bogie on a down grade. We can't stop to inquire now,
or they'll turn against us. I've forty Chiefs at my heel, and passed and
raised according to their merit they shall be. Billet these men on the
villages, and see that we run up a Lodge of some kind. The temple of Imbra
will do for a Lodge-room. The women must make aprons as you show them. I'll
hold a levee of Chiefs tonight and Lodge tomorrow.'

"I was fair run off my legs, but I wasn't such a fool as not to see what a
pull this Craft business gave us. I showed the priests' families how to make
aprons of the degrees, but for Dravot's apron the blue border and marks was
made of turquoise lumps on white hide, not cloth. We took a great square stone
in the temple for the Master's chair, and little stones for the officer's
chairs, and painted the black pavement with white squares, and did what we
could to make things regular.

"At the levee which was held that night on the hillside with big bonfires,
Dravot gives out that him and me were Gods and sons of Alexander, and Passed
Grand Masters in the Craft, and was come to make Kafiristan a country where
every man should eat in peace and drink in quiet, and specially obey us. Then
the Chiefs come round to shake hands, and they were so hairy and white and
fair it was just shaking hands with old friends. We gave them names according
as they was like men we had known in India--Billy Fish, Holly Dilworth, Pikky
Kergan, that was Bazaar-master when I was at Mhow, and so on, and so on.

 "The most amazing miracles was at Lodge next night. One of the old priests
was watching us continuous, and I felt uneasy, for I knew we'd have to fudge
the Ritual, and I didn't know what the men knew. The old priest was a stranger
come in from beyond the village of Bashkai. The minute Dravot puts on the
Master's apron that the girls had made for him, the priest fetches a whoop and
a howl, and tries to overturn the stone that Dravot was sitting on. 'It's all
up now,' I says. 'That comes of meddling with the Craft without warrant!'
Dravot never winked an eye, not when ten priests took and tilted over the
Grand Master's chair--which was to say, the stone of Imbra. The priest begins
rubbing the bottom end of it to clear away the black dirt, and presently he
shows all the other priests the Master's Mark, same as was on Dravot's apron,
cut into the stone. Not even the priests of the temple of Imbra knew it was
there. The old chap falls flat on his face at Dravot's feet and kisses 'em.
'Luck again,' says Dravot, across the Lodge, to me; 'they say it's the missing
Mark that no one could understand the why of.

We're more than safe now.' Then he bangs the butt of his gun for a gavel and
says, 'By virtue of the authority vested in me by my own right hand and the
help of Peachey, I declare myself Grand Master of all Freemasonry in
Kafiristan in this the Mother Lodge o' the country, and King of Kafiristan
equally with Peachey!' At that he puts on his crown and I puts on mine,--I was
doing Senior Warden,--and we opens the Lodge in most ample form. It was an
amazing miracle! The priests moved in Lodge through the first two degrees
almost without telling, as if the memory was coming back to them. After that
Peachey and Dravot raised such as was worthy--high priests and Chiefs of far-
off villages. Billy Fish was the first, and I can tell you we scared the soul
out of him. It was not in any way according to Ritual, but it served our turn.
We didn't raise more than ten of the biggest men, because we didn't want to
make the Degree common. And they was clamouring to be raised.

"'In another six months,' says Dravot, 'we'll hold another Communication and
see how you are working.' Then he asks them about their villages, and learns
that they was fighting one against the other, and were sick and tired of it.
And when they wasn't doing that they was fighting with the Mohammedans. 'You
can fight those when they come into our country,' says Dravot. 'Tell off every
tenth man of your tribes for a Frontier guard, and send two hundred at a time
to this valley to be drilled. Nobody is going to be shot or speared any more
so long as he does well, and I know that you won't cheat me, because you're
white people--sons of Alexander--and not like common black Mohammedans. You
are my people, and, by God,' says he, running off into English at the end,
'I'll make a damned fine Nation of you, or I'll die in the making!'

"I can't tell all we did for the next six months, because Dravot did a lot I
couldn't see the hang of, and he learned their lingo in a way I never could.
My work was to help the people plough, and now and again go out with some of
the Army and see what the other villages were doing, and make 'em throw rope
bridges across the ravines which cut up the country horrid. Dravot was very
kind to me, but when he walked up and down in the pine wood pulling that
bloody red beard of his with both fists I knew he was thinking plans I could
not advise about, and I just waited for orders.

"But Dravot never showed me disrespect before the people. They were afraid of
me and the Army, but they loved Dan. He was the best of friends with the
priests and the Chiefs; but any one could come across the hills with a
complaint, and Dravot would hear him out fair, and call four priests together
and say what was to be done.

"He used to call in Billy Fish from Bashkai, and Pikky Kergan from Shu, and an
old Chief we called Kafuzelum,--it was like enough to his real name,--and hold
councils with 'em when there was any fighting to be done in small villages.
That was his Council of War, and the four priests of Bashkai, Shu, Khawak, and
Madora was his Privy Council. Between the lot of 'em they sent me, with forty
men and twenty rifles, and sixty men carrying turquoises, into the Ghorband
country to buy those hand-made Martini rifles, that come out of the Amir's
workshops at Kabul, from one of the Amir's Herati regiments that would have
sold the very teeth out of their mouths for turquoises.

"I stayed in Ghorband a month, and gave the Governor there the pick of my
baskets for hush-money, and bribed the Colonel of the regiment some more, and,
between the two and the tribes-people, we got more than a hundred hand-made
Martinis, a hundred good Kohat Jezails that'll throw to six hundred yards, and
forty man--loads of very bad ammunition for the rifles. I came back with what
I had, and distributed 'em among the men that the Chiefs sent in to me to
drill. Dravot was too busy to attend to those things, but the old Army that we
first made helped me, and we turned out five hundred men that could drill, and
two hundred that knew how to hold arms pretty straight. Even those cork-
screwed, hand-made guns was a miracle to them. Dravot talked big about powder-
shops and factories, walking up and down in the pine wood when the winter was
coming on.

"'I won't make a Nation,' says he. 'I'll make an Empire! These men aren't
niggers; they're English! Look at their eyes--look at their mouths. Look at
the way they stand up. They sit on chairs in their own houses. They're the
Lost Tribes, or something like it, and they've grown to be English. I'll take
a census in the spring if the priests don't get frightened. There must be a
fair two million of 'em in these hills. The villages are full o' little
children. Two million people--two hundred and fifty thousand fighting men--and
all English! They only want the rifles and a little drilling. Two hundred and
fifty thousand men, ready to cut in on Russia's right flank when she tries for
India! Peachey, man,' he says, chewing his beard in great hunks, 'we shall be
Emperors--Emperors of the Earth! Rajah Brooke will be a suckling to us. I'll
treat with the Viceroy on equal terms. I'll ask him to send me twelve picked
English--twelve that I know of--to help us govern a bit. There's Mackray,
Serjeant Pensioner at Segowli--many's the good dinner he's given me, and his
wife a pair of trousers. There's Donkin, the Warder of Tounghoo Jail; there's
hundreds that I could lay my hand on if I was in India. The Viceroy shall do
it for me; I'll send a man through in the spring for those men, and I'll write
for a dispensation from the Grand Lodge for what I've done as Grand Master.
That--and all the Sniders that'll be thrown out when the native troops in
India take up the Martini. They'll be worn smooth, but they'll do for fighting
in these hills. Twelve English, a hundred thousand Sniders run through the
Amir's country in driblets,--I'd be content with twenty thousand in one year,-
-and we'd be an Empire.

"When everything was shipshape I'd hand over the crown--this crown I'm wearing
now--to Queen Victoria on my knees, and she'd say, "Rise up, Sir Daniel
Dravot." Oh, it's big! It's big, I tell you! But there's so much to be done in
every place--Bashkai, Khawak, Shu, and everywhere else.'

"'What is it?' I says. 'There are no more men coming in to be drilled this
autumn. Look at those fat black clouds. They're bringing the snow.'

"'It isn't that,' says Daniel, putting his hand very hard on my shoulder; 'and
I don't wish to say anything that's against you, for no other living man would
have followed me and made me what I am as you have done. You're a first-class
Commander-in-Chief, and the people know you; but--it's a big country, and
somehow you can't help me, Peachey, in the way I want to be helped.'

"'Go to your blasted priests, then!' I said, and I was sorry when I made that
remark, but it did hurt me sore to find Daniel talking so superior, when I'd
drilled all the men and done all he told me.

"'Don't let's quarrel, Peachey,' says Daniel, without cursing. 'You're a King
too, and the half of this Kingdom is yours; but can't you see, Peachey, we
want cleverer men than us now--three or four of 'em, that we can scatter about
for our Deputies. It's a hugeous great State, and I can't always tell the
right thing to do, and I haven't time for all I want to do, and here's the
winter coming on and all.'

"He put half his beard into his mouth, all red like the gold of his crown.

"'I'm sorry, Daniel,' says I. 'I've done all I could. I've drilled the men and
shown the people how to stack their oats better; and I've brought in those
tinware rifles from Ghorband--but I know what you're driving at. I take it
Kings always feel oppressed that way.'

"'There's another thing too,' says Dravot, walking up and down. 'The winter's
coming, and these people won't be giving much trouble, and if they do we can't
move about. I want a wife.'

"'For Gord's sake leave the women alone!' I says. 'We've both got all the work
we can, though I am a fool. Remember the Contrack, and keep clear o' women.'"

"'The Contrack only lasted till such time as we was Kings; and Kings we have
been these months past,' says Dravot, weighing his crown in his hand. 'You go
get a wife too, Peachey--a nice, strappin', plump girl that'll keep you warm
in the winter. They're prettier than English girls, and we can take the pick
of 'em. Boil 'em once or twice in hot water, and they'll come out like chicken
and ham.'

"'Don't tempt me!' I says. 'I will not have any dealings with a woman, not
till we are a dam' side more settled than we are now. I've been doing the work
o' two men, and you've been doing the work of three. Let's lie off a bit, and
see if we can get some better tobacco from Afghan country and run in some good
liquor; and no women.'"

"'Who's talking o' women?' says Dravot. 'I said wife--a Queen to breed a
King's son for the King. A Queen out of the strongest tribe, that'll make them
your blood-brothers, and that'll lie by your side and tell you all the people
thinks about you and their own affairs. That's what I want.'

"'Do you remember that Bengali woman I kept at Mogul Serai when I was a plate-
layer?' says I. 'A fat lot o' good she was to me. She taught me the lingo and
one or two other things; but what happened? She ran away with the Station-
master's servant and half my month's pay. Then she turned up at Dadur Junction
in tow of a half-caste, and had the impidence to say I was her husband--all
among the drivers in the running-shed too!'

"'We've done with that,' says Dravot; 'these women are whiter than you or me,
and a Queen I will have for the winter months.'

"'For the last time o' asking, Dan, do not,' I says. 'It'll only bring us
harm. The Bible says that Kings ain't to waste their strength on women,
'specially when they've got a new raw Kingdom to work over.'

"'For the last time of answering, I will,' said Dravot, and he went away
through the pine trees looking like a big red devil, the sun being on his
crown and beard and all.

"But getting a wife was not as easy as Dan thought. He put it before the
Council, and there was no answer till Billy Fish said that he'd better ask the
girls. Dravot damned them all round.

"'What's wrong with me?' he shouts, standing by the idol Imbra. 'Am I a dog,
or am I not enough of a man for your wenches? Haven't I put the shadow of my
hand over this country? Who stopped the last Afghan raid?' It was me really,
but Dravot was too angry to remember. 'Who bought your guns? Who repaired the
bridges? Who's the Grand Master of the sign cut in the stone?' says he, and he
thumped his hand on the block that he used to sit on in Lodge, and at Council,
which opened like Lodge always. Billy Fish said nothing, and no more did the
others. 'Keep your hair on, Dan,' said I, 'and ask the girls. That's how it's
done at Home, and these people are quite English.'

"'The marriage of the King is a matter of State,' says Dan, in a white-hot
rage, for he could feel, I hope, that he was going against his better mind. He
walked out of the Council-room, and the others sat still, looking at the
ground.

"'Billy Fish,' says I to the Chief of Bashkai, 'what's the difficulty here? A
straight answer to a true friend.'

"'You know,' says Billy Fish. 'How should a man tell you who knows everything?
How can daughters of men marry Gods or Devils? It's not proper.'

"I remembered something like that in the Bible; but, if after seeing us as
long as they had, they still believed we were Gods, it wasn't for me to
undeceive them.

"'A God can do anything,' says I. 'If the King is fond of a girl he'll not let
her die.' 'She'll have to,' said Billy Fish. 'There are all sorts of Gods and
Devils in these mountains, and now and again a girl marries one of them and
isn't seen any more. Besides, you two know the Mark cut in the stone. Only the
Gods know that. We thought you were men till you showed the sign of the
Master.'

"I wished then that we had explained about the loss of the genuine secrets of
a Master Mason at the first go-off; but I said nothing. All that night there
was a blowing of horns in a little dark temple half-way down the hill, and I
heard the girl crying fit to die. One of the priests told us that she was
being prepared to marry the King.

"'I'll have no nonsense of that kind,' says Dan. 'I don't want to interfere
with your customs, but I'll take my own wife.' 'The girl's a little bit
afraid,' says the priest. 'She thinks she's going to die, and they are a-
heartening of her up down in the temple.'

"'Hearten her very tender, then,' says Dravot, 'or I'll hearten you with the
butt of a gun so you'll never want to be heartened again.'

"He licked his lips, did Dan, and stayed up walking about more than half the
night, thinking of the wife that he was going to get in the morning. I wasn't
any means comfortable, for I knew that dealings with a woman in foreign parts,
though you was a crowned King twenty times over, could not but be risky. I got
up very early in the morning while Dravot was asleep, and I saw the priests
talking together in whispers, and the Chiefs talking together too, and they
looked at me out of the corners of their eyes.

"'What is up, Fish?' I say to the Bashkai man, who was wrapped up in his furs
and looking splendid to behold.

"'I can't rightly say,' says he; 'but if you can make the King drop all this
nonsense about marriage, you'll be doing him and me and yourself a great
service.'

"'That I do believe,' says I. 'But sure, you know, Billy, as well as me,
having fought against and for us, that the King and me are nothing more than
two of the finest men that God Almighty ever made. Nothing more, I do assure
you.'

"'That may be,' says Billy Fish, 'and yet I should be sorry if it was.' He
sinks his head upon his great fur cloak for a minute and thinks. 'King,' says
he, 'be you man or God or Devil, I'll stick by you today. I have twenty of my
men with me, and they will follow me. We'll go to Bashkai until the storm
blows over.'

"A little snow had fallen in the night, and everything was white except the
greasy fat clouds that blew down and down from the north. Dravot came out with
his crown on his head, swinging his arms and stamping his feet, and looking
more pleased than Punch.

"'For the last time, drop it, Dan,' says I, in a whisper; 'Billy Fish here
says that there will be a row.'

"'A row among my people!' says Dravot. 'Not much. Peachey, you're a fool not
to get a wife too. Where's the girl?' says he, with a voice as loud as the
braying of a jackass. 'Call up all the Chiefs and priests, and let the Emperor
see if his wife suits him.'

"There was no need to call any one. They were all there leaning on their guns
and spears round the clearing in the centre of the pine wood. A lot of priests
went down to the little temple to bring up the girl, and the horns blew fit to
wake the dead. Billy Fish saunters round and gets as close to Daniel as he
could, and behind him stood his twenty men with matchlocks--not a man of them
under six feet. I was next to Dravot, and behind me was twenty men of the
regular Army. Up comes the girl, and a strapping wench she was, covered with
silver and turquoises, but white as death, and looking back every minute at
the priests.

"'She'll do,' said Dan, looking her over. 'What's to be afraid of, lass? Come
and kiss me.' He puts his arm round her. She shuts her eyes, gives a bit of a
squeak, and down goes her face in the side of Dan's flaming-red beard.

"'The slut's bitten me!' says he, clapping his hand to his neck, and, sure
enough, his hand was red with blood. Billy Fish and two of his matchlock men
catches hold of Dan by the shoulders and drags him into the Bashkai lot, while
the priests howls in their lingo, 'Neither God nor Devil, but a man!' I was
all taken aback, for a priest cut at me in front, and the Army behind began
firing into the Bashkai men.

"'God A'mighty!' says Dan, 'what is the meaning o' this?'

"'Come back! Come away!' says Billy Fish. 'Ruin and Mutiny is the matter.
We'll break for Bashkai if we can.'

"I tried to give some sort of orders to my men,--the men o' the regular Army,-
-but it was no use, so I fired into the brown of 'em with an English Martini
and drilled three beggars in a line. The valley was full of shouting, howling
creatures, and every soul was shrieking, 'Not a God nor a Devil, but only a
man!' The Bashkai troops stuck to Billy Fish all they were worth, but their
matchlocks wasn't half as good as the Kabul breech-loaders, and four of them
dropped. Dan was bellowing like a bull, for he was very wrathy; and Billy Fish
had a hard job to prevent him running out at the crowd.

"'We can't stand,' says Billy Fish. 'Make a run for it down the valley! The
whole place is against us.' The matchlock-men ran, and we went down the valley
in spite of Dravot. He was swearing horrible and crying out that he was a
King. The priests rolled great stones on us, and the regular Army fired hard,
and there wasn't more than six men, not counting Dan, Billy Fish, and Me, that
came down to the bottom of the valley alive.

"Then they stopped firing, and the horns in the temple blew again.

"'Come away--for Gord's sake come away!' says Billy Fish. 'They'll send
runners out to all the villages before ever we get to Bashkai. I can protect
you there, but I can't do anything now."

"My own notion is that Dan began to go mad in his head from that hour. He
stared up and down like a stuck pig. Then he was all for walking back alone
and killing the priests with his bare hands; which he could have done. 'An
Emperor am I,' says Daniel, 'and next year I shall be a Knight of the Queen.'

"'All right, Dan,' says I; 'but come along now while there's time.'

"'It's your fault,' says he, 'for not looking after your Army better. There
was mutiny in the midst, and you didn't know--you damned engine-driving,
plate-laying, missionary's-pass-hunting hound!' He sat upon a rock and called
me every foul name he could lay tongue to. I was too heart-sick to care,
though it was all his foolishness that brought the smash.

"'I'm sorry, Dan,' says I, 'but there's no accounting for natives. This
business is our Fifty-seven. Maybe we'll make something out of it yet, when
we've got to Bashkai.'

"'Let's get to Bashkai, then,' says Dan, 'and, by God, when I come back here
again I'll sweep the valley so there isn't a bug in a blanket left!'

"We walked all that day, and all that night Dan was stumping up and down on
the snow, chewing his beard and muttering to himself.

"'There's no hope o' getting clear,' said Billy Fish. 'The priests have sent
runners to the villages to say that you are only men. Why didn't you stick on
as Gods till things was more settled? I'm a dead man,' says Billy Fish, and he
throws himself down on the snow and begins to pray to his Gods.

"Next morning we was in a cruel bad country--all up and down, no level ground
at all, and no food, either. The six Bashkai men looked at Billy Fish hungry-
way as if they wanted to ask something, but they never said a word. At noon we
came to the top of a flat mountain all covered with snow, and when we climbed
up into it, behold, there was an Army in position waiting in the middle!

"'The runners have been very quick,' says Billy Fish, with a little bit of a
laugh. 'They are waiting for us.'

"Three or four men began to fire from the enemy's side, and a chance shot took
Daniel in the calf of the leg. That brought him to his senses. He looks across
the snow at the Army, and sees the rifles that we had brought into the
country.

"'We're done for,' says he. 'They are Englishmen, these people,--and it's my
blasted nonsense that has brought you to this. Get back, Billy Fish, and take
your men away; you've done what you could, and now cut for it. Carnehan,' says
he, 'shake hands with me and go along with Billy, Maybe they won't kill you.
I'll go and meet 'em alone. It's me that did it! Me, the King!'

"'Go!' says I. 'Go to Hell, Dan! I'm with you here. Billy Fish, you clear out,
and we two will meet those folk.'

"'I'm a Chief,' says Billy Fish, quite quiet. 'I stay with you. My men can
go.'

"The Bashkai fellows didn't wait for a second word, but ran off, and Dan and
Me and Billy Fish walked across to where the drums were drumming and the horns
were horning. It was cold--awful cold. I've got that cold in the back of my
head now. There's a lump of it there."

The punka-coolies had gone to sleep. Two kerosene lamps were blazing in the
office, and the perspiration poured down my face and splashed on the blotter
as I leaned forward. Carnehan was shivering, and I feared that his mind might
go. I wiped my face, took a fresh grip of the piteously mangled hands, and
said, "What happened after that?"

The momentary shift of my eyes had broken the clear current.

"What was you pleased to say?" whined Carnehan. "They took them without any
sound. Not a little whisper all along the snow, not though the King knocked
down the first man that set hand on him--not though old Peachey fired his last
cartridge into the brown of 'em. Not a single solitary sound did those swines
make. They just closed up tight, and I tell you their furs stunk. There was a
man called Billy Fish, a good friend of us all, and they cut his throat, Sir,
then and there, like a pig; and the King kicks up the bloody snow and says,
'We've had a dashed fine run for our money. What's coming next?' But Peachey,
Peachey Taliaferro, I tell you, Sir, in confidence as betwixt two friends, he
lost his head, Sir. No, he didn't, neither. The King lost his head, so he did,
all along o' one of those cunning rope bridges. Kindly let me have the paper-
cutter, Sir. It tilted this way. They marched him a mile across that snow to a
rope bridge over a ravine with a river at the bottom. You may have seen such.
They prodded him behind like an ox. 'Damn your eyes!' says the King. 'D' you
suppose I can't die like a gentleman?'

"He turns to Peachey--Peachey that was crying like a child. 'I've brought you
to this, Peachey,' says he. 'Brought you out of your happy life to be killed
in Kafiristan, where you was late Commander-in-Chief of the Emperor's forces.
Say you forgive me, Peachey.' 'I do,' says Peachey. 'Fully and freely do I
forgive you, Dan.' 'Shake hands, Peachey,' says he. 'I'm going now.' Out he
goes, looking neither right nor left, and when he was plumb in the middle of
those dizzy dancing ropes, 'Cut you beggars,' he shouts; and they cut, and old
Dan fell, turning round and round and round, twenty thousand miles, for he
took half an hour to fall till he struck the water, and I could see his body
caught on a rock with the gold crown close beside.

"But do you know what they did to Peachey between two pine trees? They
crucified him, Sir, as Peachey's hand will show. They used wooden pegs for his
hands and feet; but he didn't die. He hung there and screamed, and they took
him down next day, and said it was a miracle that he wasn't dead. They took
him down--poor old Peachey that hadn't done them any harm--that hadn't done
them any--"

He rocked to and fro and wept bitterly, wiping his eyes with the back of his
scarred hands and moaning like a child for some ten minutes.

"They was cruel enough to feed him up in the temple, because they said he was
more of a God than old Daniel that was a man. Then they turned him out on the
snow, and told him to go home, and Peachey came home in about a year, begging
along the roads quite safe; for Daniel Dravot he walked before and said, 'Come
along, Peachey. It's a big thing we're doing.' The mountains they danced at
night, and the mountains they tried to fall on Peachey's head, but Dan he held
up his hand, and Peachey came along bent double. He never let go of Dan's
hand, and he never let go of Dan's head. They gave it to him as a present in
the temple, to remind him not to come again; and though the crown was pure
gold and Peachey was starving, never would Peachey sell the same. You know
Dravot, Sir! You knew Right Worshipful Brother Dravot! Look at him now!"

He fumbled in the mass of rags round his bent waist; brought out a black
horsehair bag embroidered with silver thread; and shook therefrom on to my
table--the dried, withered head of Daniel Dravot! The morning sun, that had
long been paling the lamps, struck the red beard and blind sunken eyes;
struck, too, a heavy circlet of gold studded with raw turquoises, that
Carnehan placed tenderly on the battered temples.

"You be'old now," said Carnehan, "the Emperor in his 'abit as he lived--the
King of Kafiristan with his crown upon his head. Poor old Daniel that was a
monarch once!"

I shuddered, for, in spite of defacements manifold, I recognised the head of
the man of Marwar Junction. Carnehan rose to go. I attempted to stop him. He
was not fit to walk abroad. "Let me take away the whisky, and give me a little
money," he gasped. "I was a King once. I'll go to the Deputy Commissioner and
ask to set in the Poorhouse till I get my health. No, thank you, I can't wait
till you get a carriage for me. I've urgent private affairs--in the south--at
Marwar."

He shambled out of the office and departed in the direction of the Deputy
Commissioner's house. That day at noon I had occasion to go down the blinding-
hot Mall, and I saw a crooked man crawling along the white dust of the
roadside, his hat in his hand, quavering dolorously after the fashion of
street-singers at Home. There was not a soul in sight, and he was out of all
possible earshot of the houses. And he sang through his nose, turning his head
from right to left:

 "The Son of Man goes forth to war,
 A golden crown to gain;
 His blood-red banner streams afar--
 Who follows in His train?"

I waited to hear no more, but put the poor wretch into my carriage and drove
him off to the nearest missionary for eventual transfer to the Asylum. He
repeated the hymn twice while he was with me, whom he did not in the least
recognise, and I left him singing it to the missionary.

Two days later I inquired after his welfare of the Superintendent of the
Asylum.

"He was admitted suffering from sunstroke. He died early yesterday morning,"
said the Superintendent. "Is it true that he was half an hour bareheaded in
the sun at midday?"

"Yes," said I; "but do you happen to know if he had anything upon him by any
chance when he died?"

"Not to my knowledge," said the Superintendent.

And there the matter rests.

 *  *  *  *  *  *  *  *

 "THE FINEST STORY IN THE WORLD"

 "O' ever the knightly years were gone
 With the old world to the grave,
 I was a king in Babylon
 And you were a Christian slave." 
               --W. E. Henley.

His name was Charlie Mears; he was the only son of his mother who was a widow,
and he lived in the north of London, coming into the City every day to work in
a bank. He was twenty years old and suffered from aspirations. I met him in a
public billiard-saloon where the marker called him by his given name, and he
called the marker "Bulls-eyes." Charley explained, a little nervously, that he
had only come to the place to look on, and since looking on at games of skill
is not a cheap amusement for the young, I suggested that Charlie should go
back to his mother.

That was our first step toward better acquaintance. He would call on me
sometimes in the evenings instead of running about London with his fellow-
clerks; and before long, speaking of himself as a young man must, he told me
of his aspirations, which were all literary. He desired to make himself an
undying name chiefly through verse, though he was not above sending stories of
love and death to the drop-a-penny-in-the-slot journals. It was my fate to sit
still while Charlie read me poems of many hundred lines, and bulky fragments
of plays that would surely shake the world. My reward was his unreserved
confidence, and the self-revelations and troubles of a young man are almost as
holy as those of a maiden.

Charlie had never fallen in love, but was anxious to do so on the first
opportunity; he believed in all things good and all things honorable, but, at
the same time, was curiously careful to let me see that he knew his way about
the world as befitted a bank clerk on twenty-five shillings a week.  He rhymed
"dove" with "love" and "moon" with "June," and devoutly believed that they had
never so been rhymed before. The long lame gaps in his plays he filled up with
hasty words of apology and description and swept on, seeing all that he
intended to do so clearly that he esteemed it already done, and turned to me
for applause.

I fancy that his mother did not encourage his aspirations, and I know that his
writing-table at home was the edge of his washstand. This he told me almost at
the outset of our acquaintance; when he was ravaging my bookshelves, and a
little before I was implored to speak the truth as to his chances of "writing
something really great, you know." Maybe I encouraged him too much, for, one
night, he called on me, his eyes flaming with excitement, and said
breathlessly:

"Do you mind--can you let me stay here and write all this evening? I won't
interrupt you, I won't really. There's no place for me to write in at my
mother's."

"What's the trouble?" I said, knowing well what that trouble was.

"I've a notion in my head that would make the most splendid story that was
ever written. Do let me write it out here. It's such a notion!"

There was no resisting the appeal. I set him a table; he hardly thanked me,
but plunged into the work at once. For half an hour the pen scratched without
stopping. Then Charlie sighed and tugged his hair. The scratching grew slower,
there were more erasures, and at last ceased. The finest story in the world
would not come forth.

"It looks such awful rot now" he said, mournfully. "And yet it seemed so good
when I was thinking about it. What's wrong?"

I could not dishearten him by saying the truth. So I answered: "Perhaps you
don't feel in the mood for writing."

"Yes I do--except when I look at this stuff. Ugh!"

"Read me what you've done," I said. He read, and it was wondrous bad and he
paused at all the specially turgid sentences, expecting a little approval; for
he was proud of those sentences, as I knew he would be.

"It needs compression," I suggested, cautiously.

"I hate cutting my things down. I don't think you could alter a word here
without spoiling the sense. It reads better aloud than when I was writing it."

"Charlie, you're suffering from an alarming disease afflicting a numerous
class. Put the thing by, and tackle it again in a week."

"I want to do it at once. What do you think of it?"

"How can I judge from a half-written tale? Tell me the story as it lies in
your head."

Charlie told, and in the telling there was everything that his ignorance had
so carefully prevented from escaping into the written word. I looked at him,
and wondering whether it were possible, that he did not know the originality,
the power of the notion that had come in his way? It was distinctly a Notion
among notions. Men had been puffed up with pride by notions not a tithe as
excellent and practicable. But Charlie babbled on serenely, interrupting the
current of pure fancy with samples of horrible sentences that he purposed to
use. I heard him out to the end. It would be folly to allow his idea to remain
in his own inept hands, when I could do so much with it. Not all that could be
done indeed; but, oh so much!                     

"What do you think?" he said, at last. "I fancy I shall call it 'The Story of
a Ship.'"

"I think the idea's pretty good; but you won't he able to handle it for ever
so long. Now I--"

"Would it be of any use to you? Would you care to take it? I should be proud,"
said Charlie, promptly.

There are few things sweeter in this world than the guileless, hot-headed,
intemperate, open admiration of a junior. Even a woman in her blindest
devotion does not fall into the gait of the man she adores, tilt her bonnet to
the angle at which he wears his hat, or interlard her speech with his pet
oaths. And Charlie did all these things. Still it was necessary to salve my
conscience before I possessed myself of Charlie's thoughts.

"Let's make a bargain. I'll give you a fiver for the notion," I said.

Charlie became a bank-clerk at once.

"Oh, that's impossible. Between two pals, you know, if I may call you so, and
speaking as a man of the world, I couldn't. Take the notion if it's any use to
you. I've heaps more."

He had--none knew this better than I--but they were the notions of other men.

"Look at it as a matter of business--between men of the world," I returned.
"Five pounds will buy you any number of poetry-books. Business is business,
and you may be sure I shouldn't give that price unless--"

"Oh, if you put it that way," said Charlie, visibly moved by the thought of
the books. The bargain was clinched with an agreement that he should at
unstated intervals come to me with all the notions that he possessed, should
have a table of his own to write at, and unquestioned right to inflict upon me
all his poems and fragments of poems. Then I said, "Now tell me how you came
by this idea."

"It came by itself." Charlie's eyes opened a little.

"Yes, but you told me a great deal about the hero that you must have read
before somewhere."

"I haven't any time for reading, except when you let me sit here, and on
Sundays I'm on my bicycle or down the river all day. There's nothing wrong
about the hero, is there?"

"Tell me again and I shall understand clearly. You say that your hero went
pirating. How did he live?"

"He was on the lower deck of this ship-thing that I was telling you about."

"What sort of ship?"

"It was the kind rowed with oars, and the sea spurts through the oar-holes and
the men row sitting up to their knees in water. Then there's a bench running
down between the two lines of oars and an overseer with a whip walks up and
down the bench to make the men work."

"How do you know that?"

"It's in the table. There's a rope running overhead, looped to the upper deck,
for the overseer to catch hold of when the ship rolls. When the overseer
misses the rope once and falls among the rowers, remember the hero laughs at
him and gets licked for it. He's chained to his oar of course--the hero."

"How is he chained?"

"With an iron band round his waist fixed to the bench he sits on, and a sort
of handcuff on his left wrist chaining him to the oar. He's on the lower deck
where the worst men are sent, and the only light comes from the hatchways and
through the oar-holes. Can't you imagine the sunlight just squeezing through
between the handle and the hole and wobbling about as the ship moves?"

"I can, but I can't imagine your imagining it."

"How could it be any other way? Now you listen to me. The long oars on the
upper deck are managed by four men to each bench, the lower ones by three, and
the lowest of all by two. Remember it's quite dark on the lowest deck and all
the men there go mad. When a man dies at his oar on that deck he isn't thrown
overboard, but cut up in his chains and stuffed through the oar-hole in little
pieces."

"Why?" I demanded, amazed, not so much at the information as the tone of
command in which it was flung out.

"To save trouble and to frighten the others. It needs two overseers to drag a
man's body up to the top deck; and if the men at the lower deck oars were left
alone, of course they'd stop rowing and try to pull up the benches by all
standing up together in their chains."

"You've a most provident imagination. Where have you been reading about
galleys and galley-slaves?"

"Nowhere that I remember. I row a little when I get the chance. But, perhaps,
if you say so, I may have read something."

He went away shortly afterward to deal with booksellers, and I wondered how a
bank clerk aged twenty could put into my hands with a profligate abundance of
detail, all given with absolute assurance, the story of extravagant and
bloodthirsty adventure, riot, piracy, and death in unnamed seas. He had led
his hero a desperate dance through revolt against the overseas, to command of
a ship of his own, and ultimate establishment of a kingdom on an island
"somewhere in the sea, you know"; and, delighted with my paltry five pounds,
had gone out to buy the notions of other men, that these might teach him how
to write. I had the consolation of knowing that this notion was mine by right
of purchase, and I thought that I could make something of it.

When next he came to me he was drunk--royally drunk on many poets for the
first time revealed to him. His pupils were dilated, his words tumbled over
each other, and he wrapped himself in quotations. Most of all was he drunk
with Longfellow.

"Isn't it splendid? Isn't it superb?" he cried, after hasty greetings.

"Listen to this--

"'Wouldst thou,' so the helmsman answered,
'Know the secret of the sea?
Only those who brave its dangers
Comprehend its mystery.'

"By gum!

"'Only those who brave its dangers Comprehend its mystery.'" he repeated
twenty times, walking up and down the room and forgetting me. "But I can
understand it too," he said to himself. "I don't know how to thank you for
that fiver. And this; listen--

"'I remember the black wharves and the ships
And the sea-tides tossing free,
And the Spanish sailors with bearded lips,
And the beauty and mystery of the ships,
And the magic of the sea.'

"I haven't braved any dangers, but I feel as if I knew all about it."

"You certainly seem to have a grip of the sea. Have you ever seen it?"

"When I was a little chap I went to Brighton once; we used to live in
Coventry, though, before we came to London. I never saw it,

"'When descends on the Atlantic The gigantic Storm-wind of the Equinox.'"

He shook me by the shoulder to make me understand the passion that was shaking
himself.

"When that storm comes," he continued, "I think that all the oars in the ship
that I was talking about get broken, and the rowers have their chests smashed
in by the bucking oar-heads. By the way, have you done anything with that
notion of mine yet?"

"No. I was waiting to hear more of it from you. Tell me how in the world
you're so certain about the fittings of the ship. You know nothing of ships."

"I don't know. It's as real as anything to me until I try to write it down. I
was thinking about it only last night in bed, after you had loaned me
'Treasure Island'; and I made up a whole lot of new things to go into the
story."

"What sort of things?"

"About the food the men ate; rotten figs and black beans and wine in a skin
bag, passed from bench to bench."

"Was the ship built so long ago as that?"

"As what? I don't know whether it was long ago or not. It's only a notion, but
sometimes it seems just as real as if it was true. Do I bother you with
talking about it?"

"Not in the least. Did you make up anything else?"

"Yes, but it's nonsense." Charlie flushed a little.

"Never mind; let's hear about it."

"Well, I was thinking over the story, and after awhile I got out of bed and
wrote down on a piece of paper the sort of stuff the men might be supposed to
scratch on their oars with the edges of their handcuffs. It seemed to make the
thing more lifelike. It is so real to me, y'know."

"Have you the paper on you?"

"Ye-es, but what's the use of showing it? It's only a lot of scratches. All
the same, we might have 'em reproduced in the book on the front page."

"I'll attend to those details. Show me what your men wrote."

He pulled out of his pocket a sheet of note-paper, with a single line of
scratches upon it, and I put this carefully away.

"What is it supposed to mean in English?" I said.

"Oh, I don't know. Perhaps it means 'I'm beastly tired.' It's great nonsense,"
he repeated, "but all those men in the ship seem as real people to me. Do do
something to the notion soon; I should like to see it written and printed."

"But all you've told me would make a long book."

"Make it then. You've only to sit down and write it out."

"Give me a little time. Have you any more notions?"

"Not just now. I'm reading all the books I've bought. They're splendid."

When he had left I looked at the sheet of note-paper with the inscription upon
it. Then I took my head tenderly between both hands, to make certain that it
was not coming off or turning round.

Then--but there seemed to be no interval between quitting my rooms and finding
myself arguing with a policeman outside a door marked Private in a corridor of
the British Museum. All I demanded, as politely as possible, was "the Greek
antiquity man." The policeman knew nothing except the rules of the Museum, and
it became necessary to forage through all the houses and offices inside the
gates. An elderly gentleman called away from his lunch put an end to my search
by holding the note-paper between finger and thumb and sniffing at it
scornfully.

"What does this mean? H'mm," said he. "So far as I can ascertain it is an
attempt to write extremely corrupt Greek on the part"--here he glared at me
with intention--"of an extremely illiterate--ah--person." He read slowly from
the paper, "Pollock, Erckman, Tauchnitz, Henniker"--four names familiar to me.

"Can you tell me what the corruption is supposed to mean--the gist of the
thing?" I asked.

"'I have been--many times--overcome with weariness in this particular
employment. That is the meaning.'" He returned me the paper, and I fled
without a word of thanks, explanation, or apology.

I might have been excused for forgetting much. To me of all men had been given
the chance to write the most marvelous tale in the world, nothing less than
the story of a Greek galley-slave, as told by himself. Small wonder that his
dreaming had seemed real to Charlie. The Fates that are so careful to shut the
doors of each successive life behind us had, in this case, been neglectful,
and Charlie was looking, though that he did not know, where never man had been
permitted to look with full knowledge since Time began. Above all he was
absolutely ignorant of the knowledge sold to me for five pounds; and he would
retain that ignorance, for bank-clerks do not understand metempsychosis, and a
sound commercial education does not include Greek. He would supply me--here I
capered among the dumb gods of Egypt and laughed in their battered faces--with
material to make my tale sure--so sure that the world would hail it as an
impudent and vamped fiction. And I--I alone would know that it was absolutely
and literally true. I alone held this jewel to my hand for the cutting and
polishing.

Therefore I danced again among the gods till a policeman saw me and took steps
in my direction.

It remained now only to encourage Charlie to talk, and here there was no
difficulty. But I had forgotten those accursed books of poetry. He came to me
time after time, as useless as a surcharged phonograph--drunk on Byron,
Shelley, or Keats. Knowing now what the boy had been in his past lives, and
desperately anxious not to lose one word of his babble, I could not hide from
him my respect and interest. He misconstrued both into respect for the present
soul of Charlie Mears, to whom life was as new as it was to Adam, and interest
in his readings; and stretched my patience to breaking point by reciting
poetry--not his own now, but that of others. I wished every English poet
blotted out of the memory of mankind. I blasphemed the mightiest names of song
because they had drawn Charlie from the path of direct narrative, and would,
later, spur him to imitate them; but I choked down my impatience until the
first flood of enthusiasm should have spent itself and the boy returned to his
dreams.

"What's the use of my telling you what I think, when these chaps wrote things
for the angels to read?" he growled, one evening. "Why don't you write
something like theirs?"

"I don't think you're treating me quite fairly," I said, speaking under strong
restraint.

"I've given you the story," he said, shortly replunging into "Lara."

"But I want the details."

"The things I make up about that damned ship that you call a galley? They're
quite easy. You can just make 'em up yourself. Turn up the gas a little, I
want to go on reading."

I could have broken the gas globe over his head for his amazing stupidity. I
could indeed make up things for myself did I only know what Charlie did not
know that he knew. But since the doors were shut behind me I could only wait
his youthful pleasure and strive to keep him in good temper. One minute's want
of guard might spoil a priceless revelation: now and again he would toss his
books aside--he kept them in my rooms, for his mother would have been shocked
at the waste of good money had she seen them--and launched into his sea
dreams. Again I cursed all the poets of England. The plastic mind of the bank-
clerk had been overlaid, colored and distorted by that which he had read, and
the result as delivered was a confused tangle of other voices most like the
muttered song through a City telephone in the busiest part of the day.

He talked of the galley--his own galley had he but known it--with
illustrations borrowed from the "Bride of Abydos." He pointed the experiences
of his hero with quotations from "The Corsair," and threw in deep and
desperate moral reflections from "Cain" and "Manfred," expecting me to use
them all. Only when the talk turned on Longfellow were the jarring cross-
currents dumb, and I knew that Charlie was speaking the truth as he remembered
it.

"What do you think of this?" I said one evening, as soon as I understood the
medium in which his memory worked best, and, before he could expostulate read
him the whole of "The Saga of King Olaf!"

He listened open-mouthed, flushed his hands drumming on the back of the sofa
where he lay, till I came to the Songs of Emar Tamberskelver and the verse:

"Emar then, the arrow taking
 From the loosened string,
Answered: 'That was Norway breaking
 'Neath thy hand, O King.'"

He gasped with pure delight of sound.

"That's better than Byron, a little," I ventured.

"Better? Why it's true! How could he have known?"

I went back and repeated:

 "'What was that?' said Olaf, standing
 On the quarter-deck,
 'Something heard I like the stranding
 Of a shattered wreck.'"

"How could he have known how the ships crash and the oars rip out and go z-zzp
all along the line? Why only the other night--But go back please and read 'The
Skerry of Shrieks' again."

"No, I'm tired. Let's talk. What happened the other night?"

"I had an awful nightmare about that galley of ours. I dreamed I was drowned
in a fight. You see we ran alongside another ship in harbor. The water was
dead still except where our oars whipped it up. You know where I always sit in
the galley?" He spoke haltingly at first, under a fine English fear of being
laughed at.

"No. That's news to me," I answered, meekly, my heart beginning to beat.

"On the fourth oar from the bow on the right side on the upper deck. There
were four of us at the oar, all chained. I remember watching the water and
trying to get my handcuffs off before the row began. Then we closed up on the
other ship, and all their fighting men jumped over our bulwarks, and my bench
broke and I was pinned down with the three other fellows on top of me, and the
big oar jammed across our backs."

"Well?" Charlie's eyes were alive and alight. He was looking at the wall
behind my chair.

"I don't know how we fought. The men were trampling all over my back, and I
lay low. Then our rowers on the left side--tied to their oars, you know--began
to yell and back water. I could hear the water sizzle, and we spun round like
a cockchafer and I knew, lying where I was, that there was a galley coming up
bow-on, to ram us on the left side. I could just lift up my head and see her
sail over the bulwarks. We wanted to meet her bow to bow, but it was too late.
We could only turn a little bit because the galley on our right had hooked
herself on to us and stopped our moving. Then, by gum! there was a crash! Our
left oars began to break as the other galley, the moving one y'know, stuck her
nose into them. Then the lower-deck oars shot up through the deck-planking,
butt first, and one of them jumped clean up into the air and came down again
close to my head."

"How was that managed?"

"The moving galley's bow was plunking them back through their own oarholes,
and I could hear the devil of a shindy in the decks below. Then her nose
caught us nearly in the middle, and we tilted sideways, and the fellows in the
right-hand galley unhitched their hooks and ropes, and threw things on to our
upper deck--arrows, and hot pitch or something that stung, and we went up and
up and up on the left side, and the right side dipped, and I twisted my head
round and saw the water stand still as it topped the right bulwarks, and then
it curled over and crashed down on the whole lot of us on the right side, and
I felt it hit my back, and I woke."

"One minute, Charlie. When the sea topped the bulwarks, what did it look
like?" I had my reasons for asking. A man of my acquaintance had once gone
down with a leaking ship in a still sea, and had seen the water-level pause
for an instant ere it fell on the deck.

"It looked just like a banjo-string drawn tight, and it seemed to stay there
for years," said Charlie.

Exactly! The other man had said: "It looked like a silver wire laid down along
the bulwarks, and I thought it was never going to break." He had paid
everything except the bare life for this little valueless piece of knowledge,
and I had traveled ten thousand weary miles to meet him and take his knowledge
at second hand. But Charlie, the bank-clerk, on twenty-five shillings a week,
he who had never been out of sight of a London omnibus, knew it all. It was no
consolation to me that once in his lives he had been forced to die for his
gains. I also must have died scores of times, but behind me, because I could
have used my knowledge, the doors were shut.

"And then?" I said, trying to put away the devil of envy.

"The funny thing was, though, in all the mess I didn't feel a bit astonished
or frightened. It seemed as if I'd been in a good many fights, because I told
my next man so when the row began. But that cad of an overseer on my deck
wouldn't unloose our chains and give us a chance. He always said that we'd all
he set free after a battle, but we never were; We never were." Charlie shook
his head mournfully.

"What a scoundrel!"

"I should say he was. He never gave us enough to eat, and sometimes we were so
thirsty that we used to drink salt-water. I can taste that salt-water still.''

"Now tell me something about the harbor where the fight was fought."

"I didn't dream about that. I know it was a harbor, though; because we were
tied up to a ring on a white wall and all the face of the stone under water
was covered with wood to prevent our ram getting chipped when the tide made us
rock."

"That's curious. Our hero commanded the galley? Didn't he?"

"Didn't he just! He stood by the bows and shouted like a good 'un. He was the
man who killed the overseer."

"But you were all drowned together, Charlie, weren't you?"

"I can't make that fit quite," he said with a puzzled look. "The galley must
have gone down with all hands and yet I fancy that the hero went on living
afterward. Perhaps he climbed into the attacking ship. I wouldn't see that, of
course. I was dead, you know."

He shivered slightly and protested that he could remember no more.

I did not press him further, but to satisfy myself that he lay in ignorance of
the workings of his own mind, deliberately introduced him to Mortimer
Collins's "Transmigration," and gave him a sketch of the plot before he opened
the pages.

"What rot it all is!" he said, frankly, at the end of an hour. "I don't
understand his nonsense about the Red Planet Mars and the King, and the rest
of it. Chuck me the Longfellow again."

I handed him the book and wrote out as much as I could remember of his
description of the sea-fight, appealing to him from time to time for
confirmation of fact or detail. He would answer without raising his eyes from
the book, as assuredly as though all his knowledge lay before flint on the
printed page. I spoke under the normal key of my voice that the current might
not be broken, and I know that he was not aware of what he was saying, for his
thoughts were out on the sea with Longfellow.

"Charlie," I asked, "when the rowers on the galleys mutinied how did they kill
their overseers?"

"Tore up the benches and brained 'em. That happened when a heavy sea was
running. An overseer on the lower deck slipped from the centre plank and fell
among the rowers. They choked him to death against the side of the ship with
their chained hands quite quietly, and it was too dark for the other overseer
to see what had happened. When he asked, he was pulled down too and choked,
and the lower deck fought their way up deck by deck, with the pieces of the
broken benches banging behind 'em. How they howled!"

"And what happened after that?"

"I don't know. The hero went away--red hair and red beard and all. That was
after he had captured our galley, I think"

The sound of my voice irritated him, and he motioned slightly with his left
hand as a man does when interruption jars.

"You never told me he was redheaded before, or that he captured your galley,"
I said, after a discreet interval.

Charlie did not raise his eyes.

"He was as red as a red bear," said he, abstractedly. "He came from the north;
they said so in the galley when he looked for rowers--not slaves, but free
men.  Afterward--years and years afterward--news came from another ship, or
else he came back"--His lips moved in silence. He was rapturously retasting
some poem before him.

"Where had he been, then?" I was almost whispering that the sentence might
come gentle to whichever section of Charlie's brain was working on my behalf.

"To the Beaches--the Long and Wonderful Beaches!" was the reply, after a
minute of silence.

"To Furdurstrandi?" I asked, tingling from head to foot.

"Yes, to Furdurstrandi," he pronounced the word in a new fashion "And I too
saw"--The voice failed.

"Do you know what you have said?" I shouted, incautiously.

He lifted his eyes, fully roused now. "No!" he snapped. "I wish you'd let a
chap go on reading. Hark to this:

"'But Othere, the old sea captain,
 He neither paused nor stirred
 Till the king listened, and then
 Once more took up his pen
 And wrote down every word.

 "'And to the King of the Saxons
 In witness of the truth,
 Raising his noble head,
 He stretched his brown hand and said,
 "Behold this walrus tooth."

"By Jove, what chaps those must have been, to go sailing all over the shop
never knowing where they'd fetch the land! Hah!"

"Charlie," I pleaded, "if you'll only be sensible for a minute or two I'll
make our hero in our tale every inch as good as Othere."

"Umph!  Longfellow wrote that poem. I don't care about writing things any
more. I want to read." He was thoroughly out of tune now, and raging over my
own ill-luck, I left him.

Conceive yourself at the door of the world's treasure-house guarded by a
child--an idle irresponsible child playing knuckle-bones--on whose favor
depends the gift of the key, and you will imagine one-half my torment. Till
that evening Charlie had spoken nothing that might not lie within the
experiences of a Greek galley-slave. But now, or there was no virtue in books,
he had talked of some desperate adventure of the Vikings, of Thorfin
Karlsefne's sailing to Wineland, which is America, in the ninth or tenth
century. The battle in the harbor he had seen; and his own death he had
described. But this was a much more startling plunge into the past. Was it
possible that he had skipped half a dozen lives and was then dimly remembering
some episode of a thousand years later? It was a maddening jumble, and the
worst of it was that Charlie Mears in his normal condition was the last person
in the world to clear it up. I could only wait and watch, but I went to bed
that night full of the wildest imaginings. There was nothing that was not
possible if Charlie's detestable memory only held good.

I might rewrite the Saga of Thorfin Karlsefne as it had never been written
before, might tell the story of the first discovery of America, myself the
discoverer. But I was entirely at Charlie's mercy, and so long as there was a
three-and-six-penny Bohn volume within his reach Charlie would not tell. I
dared not curse him openly; I hardly dared jog his memory, for I was dealing
with the experiences of a thousand years ago, told through the mouth of a boy
of today; and a boy of today is affected by every change of tone and gust of
opinion, so that he lies even when he desires to speak the truth.

I saw no more of him for nearly a week. When next I met him it was in
Gracechurch Street with a billbook chained to his waist.

Business took him over London Bridge and I accompanied him. He was very full
of the importance of that book and magnified it.

As we passed over the Thames we paused to look at a steamer unloading great
slabs of white and brown marble. A barge drifted under the steamer's stern and
a lonely cow in that barge bellowed.

Charlie's face changed from the face of the bank-clerk to that of an unknown
and--though he would not have believed this--a much shrewder man. He flung out
his arm across the parapet of the bridge, and laughing very loudly, said:
"When they heard our bulls bellow the Skroelings ran away!"

I waited only for an instant, but the barge and the cow had disappeared under
the bows of the steamer before I answered.

"Charlie, what do you suppose are Skroelings?"

"Never heard of 'em before. They sound like a new kind of seagull. What a chap
you are for asking questions!" he replied. "I have to go to the cashier of the
Omnibus Company yonder. Will you wait for me and we can lunch somewhere
together? I've a notion for a poem."

"No, thanks. I'm off. You're sure you know nothing about Skroelings?"

"Not unless he's been entered for the Liverpool Handicap." He nodded and
disappeared in the crowd.

Now it is written in the Saga of Eric the Red or that of Thorfin Karlsefne,
that nine hundred years ago when Karlsefne's galleys came to Leif's booths,
which Leif had erected in the unknown land called Markland, which may or may
not have been Rhode Island, the Skroelings--and the Lord He knows who these
may or may not have been--came to trade with the Vikings, and ran away because
they were frightened at the bellowing of the cattle which Thorfin had brought
with him in the ships. But what in the world could a Greek slave know of that
affair? I wandered up and down among the streets trying to unravel the
mystery, and the more I considered it, the more baffling it grew. One thing
only seemed certain and that certainty took away my breath for the moment. If
I came to full knowledge of anything at all, it would not be one life of the
soul in Charlie Mears's body, but half a dozen--half a dozen several and
separate existences spent on blue water in the morning of the world!

Then I walked round the situation.

Obviously if I used my knowledge I should stand alone and unapproachable until
all men were as wise as myself. That would be something, but manlike I was
ungrateful. It seemed bitterly unfair that Charlie's memory should fail me
when I needed it most.

Great Powers above--I looked up at them through the fog smoke--did the Lords
of Life and Death know what this meant to me? Nothing less than eternal fame
of the best kind; that comes from One, and is shared by one alone. I would be
content--remembering Clive, I stood astounded at my own moderation,--with the
mere right to tell one story, to work out one little contribution to the light
literature of the day. If Charlie were permitted full recollection for one
hour--for sixty short minutes--of existences that had extended over a thousand
years--I would forego all profit and honor from all that I should make of his
speech. I would take no share in the commotion that would follow throughout
the particular corner of the earth that calls itself "the world." The thing
should be put forth anonymously. Nay, I would make other men believe that they
had written it. They would hire bull-hided self-advertising Englishmen to
bellow it abroad. Preachers would found a fresh conduct of life upon it,
swearing that it was new and that they had lifted the fear of death from all
mankind. Every Orientalist in Europe would patronize it discursively with
Sanskrit and Pali texts. Terrible women would invent unclean variants of the
men's belief for the elevation of their sisters. Churches and religions would
war over it. Between the hailing and re-starting of an omnibus I foresaw the
scuffles that would arise among half a dozen denominations all professing "the
doctrine of the True Metempsychosis as applied to the world and the New Era";
and saw, too, the respectable English newspapers shying, like frightened kine,
over the beautiful simplicity of the tale. The mind leaped forward a hundred--
two hundred--a thousand years. I saw with sorrow that men would mutilate and
garble the story; that rival creeds would turn it upside down till, at last,
the western world which clings to the dread of death more closely than the
hope of life, would set it aside as an interesting superstition and stampede
after some faith so long forgotten that it seemed altogether new. Upon this I
changed the terms of the bargain that I would make with the Lords of Life and
Death. Only let me know, let me write, the story with sure knowledge that I
wrote the truth, and I would burn the manuscript as a solemn sacrifice. Five
minutes after the last line was written I would destroy it all. But I must be
allowed to write it with absolute certainty.

There was no answer. The flaming colors of an Aquarium poster caught my eye
and I wondered whether it would be wise or prudent to lure Charlie into the
hands of the professional mesmerist, and whether, if he were under his power,
he would speak of his past lives. If he did, and if people believed him--but
Charlie would be frightened and flustered, or made conceited by the
interviews. In either case he would begin to lie, through fear or vanity. He
was safest in my own hands.

"They are very funny fools, your English," said a voice at my elbow, and
turning round I recognized a casual acquaintance, a young Bengali law student,
called Grish Chunder, whose father had sent him to England to become
civilized. The old man was a retired native official, and on an income of five
pounds a month contrived to allow his son two hundred pounds a year, and the
run of his teeth in a city where he could pretend to be the cadet of a royal
house, and tell stories of the brutal Indian bureaucrats who ground the faces
of the poor.

Grish Chunder was a young, fat, full-bodied Bengali dressed with scrupulous
care in frock coat, tall hat, light trousers and tan gloves. But I had known
him in the days when the brutal Indian Government paid for his university
education, and he contributed cheap sedition to Sachi Durpan, and intrigued
with the wives of his schoolmates.

"That is very funny and very foolish," he said, nodding at the poster. "I am
going down to the Northbrook Club. Will you come too?"

I walked with him for some time. "You are not well," he said. "What is there
in your mind? You do not talk."

"Grish Chunder, you've been too well educated to believe in a God, haven't
vou?"

"Oah, yes, here! But when I go home I must conciliate popular superstition,
and make ceremonies of purification, and my women will anoint idols."

"And bang up tulsi and feast the purohit, and take you back into caste again
and make a good khuttri of you again, you advanced social Free-thinker. And
you'll eat desi food, and like it all, from the smell in the courtyard to the
mustard oil over you."

"I shall very much like it," said Grish Chunder, unguardedly. "Once a Hindu--
always a Hindu. But I like to know what the English think they know."

"I'll tell you something that one Englishman knows. It's an old tale to you."

I began to tell the story of Charlie in English, but Grish Chunder put a
question in the vernacular, and the history went forward naturally in the
tongue best suited for its telling. After all it could never have been told in
English. Grish Chunder heard me, nodding from time to time, and then came up
to my rooms where I finished the tale.

"Beshak," he said, philosophically. "Lekin darwaza band hai. (Without doubt,
but the door is shut.) I have heard of this remembering of previous existences
among my people. It is of course an old tale with us, but, to happen to an
Englishman--a cow-fed Malechk--an outcast. By Jove, that is most peculiar!"

"Outcast yourself, Grish Chunder! You eat cow-beef every day. Let's think the
thing over. The boy remembers his incarnations."

"Does he know that?" said Grish Chunder, quietly, swinging his legs as he sat
on my table. He was speaking in English now.

"He does not know anything. Would I speak to you if he did? Go on!"

"There is no going on at all. If you tell that to your friends they will say
you are mad and put it in the papers. Suppose, now, you prosecute for libel."

"Let's leave that out of the question entirely. Is there any chance of his
being made to speak?"

"There is a chance. Oah, yess! But if he spoke it would mean that all this
world would end now--instanto--fall down on your head. These things are not
allowed, you know. As I said, the door is shut."

"Not a ghost of a chance?"

"How can there be? You are a Christian, and it is forbidden to eat, in your
books, of the Tree of Life, or else you would never die. How shall you all
fear death if you all know what your friend does not know that he knows? I am
afraid to be kicked, but I am not afraid to die, because I know what I know.
You are not afraid to be kicked, but you are afraid to die. If you were not,
by God! you English would be all over the shop in an hour, upsetting the
balances of power, and making commotions. It would not be good. But no fear.
He will remember a little and a little less, and he will call it dreams. Then
he will forget altogether. When I passed my First Arts Examination in Calcutta
that was all in the cram-book on Wordsworth. Trailing clouds of glory, you
know."

"This seems to be an exception to the rule."

"There are no exceptions to rules. Some are not so hard-looking as others, but
they are all the same when you touch. If this friend of yours said so-and-so
and so-and-so, indicating that he remembered all his lost lives, or one piece
of a lost life, he would not be in the bank another hour. He would be what you
called sack because he was mad, and they would send him to an asylum for
lunatics. You can see that, my friend."

"Of course I can, but I wasn't thinking of him. His name need never appear in
the story."

"Ah! I see. That story will never be written. You can try."

"I am going to."

"For your own credit and for the sake of money, of course?"

"No. For the sake of writing the story. On my honor that will be all."

"Even then there is no chance. You cannot play with the Gods. It is a very
pretty story now. As they say, Let it go on that--I mean at that.  Be quick;
he will not last long."

"How do you mean?"

"What I say. He has never, so far, thought about a woman."

"Hasn't he though!" I remembered some of Charlie's confidences.

"I mean no woman has thought about him. When that comes; bushogya--all up' I
know. There are millions of women here. Housemaids, for instance."

I winced at the thought of my story being ruined by a housemaid.

And yet nothing was more probable.

Grish Chunder grinned.

"Yes--also pretty girls--cousins of his house, and perhaps not of his house.
One kiss that he gives back again and remembers will cure all this nonsense.
or else"--

"Or else what? Remember he does not know that he knows."

"I know that. Or else, if nothing happens he will become immersed in the trade
and the financial speculations like the rest. It must be so. You can see that
it must be so. But the woman will come first, I think."

There was a rap at the door, and Charlie charged in impetuously. He had been
released from office, and by the look in his eyes I could see that he had come
over for a long talk; most probably with poems in his pockets. Charlie's poems
were very wearying, but sometimes they led him to talk about the galley.

Grish Chunder looked at him keenly for a minute.

"I beg your pardon," Charlie said, uneasily; "I didn't know you had any one
with you."

"I am going," said Grish Chunder.

He drew me into the lobby as he departed.

"That is your man," he said, quickly. "I tell you he will never speak all you
wish. That is rot--bosh. But he would be most good to make to see things.
Suppose now we pretend that it was only play"--I had never seen Grish Chunder
so excited--"and pour the ink-pool into his hand. Eh, what do you think? I
tell you that he could see anything that a man could see. Let me get the ink
and the camphor. He is a seer and he will tell us very many things."

"He may be all you say, but I'm not going to trust him to your Gods and
devils."

"It will not hurt him. He will only feel a little stupid and dull when he
wakes up. You have seen boys look into the ink-pool before."

"That is the reason why I am not going to see it any more. You'd better go,
Grish Chunder."

He went, declaring far down the staircase that it was throwing away my only
chance of looking into the future.

This left me unmoved, for I was concerned for the past, and no peering of
hypnotized boys into mirrors and ink-pools would help me do that. But I
recognized Grish Chunder's point of view and sympathized with it.

"What a big black brute that was!" said Charlie, when I returned to him.
"Well, look here, I've just done a poem; dil it instead of playing dominoes
after lunch. May I read it?"

"Let me read it to myself."

"Then you miss the proper expression. Besides, you always make my things sound
as if the rhymes were all wrong."

"Read it aloud, then. You're like the rest of 'em."

Charlie mouthed me his poem, and it was not much worse than the average of his
verses. He had been reading his book faithfully, but he was not pleased when I
told him that I preferred my Longfellow undiluted with Charlie.

Then we began to go through the MS. line by line; Charlie parrying every
objection and correction with: "Yes, that may be better, but you don't catch
what I'm driving at."

Charlie was, in one way at least, very like one kind of poet.

There was a pencil scrawl at the back of the paper and "What's that?" I said.

"Oh that's not poetry 't all. It's some rot I wrote last night before I went
to bed and it was too much bother to hunt for rhymes; so I made it a sort of a
blank verse instead."

Here is Charlie's "blank verse":

 "We pulled for you when the wind was against us and the sails were low.
 "Will you never let us go?

 "We ate bread and onions when you took towns or ran aboard quickly when you
were beaten back by the foe,
 
"The captains walked up and down the deck in fair weather singing songs, but
we were below,

 "We fainted with our chins on the oars and you did not see that we were idle
for we still swung to and fro.
 "Will you never let us go?

 "The salt made the oar handles like sharkskin; our knees were cut to the bone
with salt cracks; our hair was stuck to our foreheads; and our lips were cut
to our gums and you whipped us because we could not row.
 "Will you never let us go?

 "But in a little time we shall run out of the portholes as the water runs
along the oarblade, and though you tell the others to row after us you will
never catch us till you catch the oar-thresh and tie up the winds in the belly
of the sail. Aho!
 "Will you never let us go?"

"H'm. What's oar-thresh, Charlie?"

"The water washed up by the oars. That's the sort of song they might sing in
the galley, y'know. Aren't you ever going to finish that story and give me
some of the profits?"

"It depends on yourself. If you had only told me more about your hero in the
first instance it might have been finished by now. You're so hazy in your
notions."

"I only want to give you the general notion of it--the knocking about from
place to place and the fighting and all that. Can't you fill in the rest
yourself? Make the hero save a girl on a pirate-galley and marry her or do
something."

"You're a really helpful collaborator. I suppose the hero went through some
few adventures before he married."

"Well then, make him a very artful card--a low sort of man--a sort of
political man who went about making treaties and breaking them--a black-haired
chap who hid behind the mast when the fighting began."

"But you said the other day that he was red-haired."

"I couldn't have. Make him black-haired of course. You've no imagination."

Seeing that I had just discovered the entire principles upon which the half-
memory falsely called imagination is based, I felt entitled to laugh, but
forbore, for the sake of the tale.

"You're right. You're the man with imagination. A black-haired chap in a
decked ship," I said.

"No, an open ship--like a big boat."

This was maddening.

"Your ship has been built and designed, closed and decked in; you said so
yourself," I protested.

"No, no, not that ship. That was open, or half decked because--By Jove you're
right. You made me think of the hero as a red-haired chap. Of course if he
were red, the ship would be an open one with painted sails."

Surely, I thought he would remember now that he had served in two galleys at
least--in a three-decked Greek one under the black-haired "political man," and
again in a Viking's open sea-serpent under the man "red as a red bear" who
went to Markland. The devil prompted me to speak.

"Why, 'of course,' Charlie?" said I. "I don't know. Are you making fun of me?"

The current was broken for the time being. I took up a notebook and pretended
to make many entries in it.

"It's a pleasure to work with an imaginative chap like yourself," I said after
a pause. "The way that you've brought out the character of the hero is simply
wonderful."

"Do you think so?" he answered, with a pleased flush. "I often tell myself
that there's more in me than my--than people think."

"There's an enormous amount in you."

"Then, won't you let me send an essay on The Ways of Bank Clerks to Tit-Bits,
and get the guinea prize?"

"That wasn't exactly what I meant, old fellow: perhaps it would be better to
wait a little and go ahead with the galley-story."

"Ah, but I sha'n't get the credit of that. Tit-Bits would publish my name and
address if I win. What are you grinning at? They would."

"I know it. Suppose you go for a walk. I want to look through my notes about
our story."

Now this reprehensible youth who left me, a little hurt and put back, might
for aught he or I knew have been one of the crew of the Argo--had been
certainly slave or comrade to Thorfin Karlsefne. Therefore he was deeply
interested in guinea competitions. Remembering what Grish Chunder had said I
laughed aloud. The Lords of Life and Death would never allow Charlie Mears to
speak with full knowledge of his pasts, and I must even piece out what he had
told me with my own poor inventions while Charlie wrote of the ways of bank-
clerks.

I got together and placed on one file all my notes; and the net result was not
cheering. I read them a second time. There was nothing that might not have
been compiled at second-hand from other people's books--except, perhaps, the
story of the fight in the harbor. The adventures of a Viking bad been written
many times before; the history of a Greek galley-slave was no new thing, and
though I wrote both, who could challenge or confirm the accuracy of my
details? I might as well tell a tale of two thousand years hence. The Lords of
Life and Death were as cunning as Grish Chunder had hinted. They would allow
nothing to escape that might trouble or make easy the minds of men. Though I
was convinced of this, yet I could not leave the tale alone. Exaltation
followed reaction, not once, but twenty times in the next few weeks. My moods
varied with the March sunlight and flying clouds. By night or in the beauty of
a spring morning I perceived that I could write that tale and shift continents
thereby. In the wet, windy afternoons, I saw that the tale might indeed be
written, but would be nothing more than a faked, false-varnished, sham-rusted
piece of Wardour Street work at the end. Then I blessed Charlie in many ways--
though it was no fault of his. He seemed to be busy with prize competitions,
and I saw less and less of him as the weeks went by and the earth cracked and
grew ripe to spring, and the buds swelled in their sheaths. He did not care to
read or talk of what he had read, and there was a new ring of self-assertion
in his voice. I hardly cared to remind him of the galley when we met; but
Charlie alluded to it on every occasion, always as a story from which money
was to be made.

"I think I deserve twenty-five per cent., don't I, at least," be said, with
beautiful frankness. "I supplied all the ideas, didn't I?"

This greediness for silver was a new side in his nature. I assumed that it had
been developed in the City, where Charlie was picking up the curious nasal
drawl of the underbred City man.

"When the thing's done we'll talk about it. I can't make anything of it at
present. Red-haired or black-haired hero are equally difficult."

He was sitting by the fire staring at the red coals. "I can't understand what
you find so difficult. It's all as clean as mud to me," he replied. A jet of
gas puffed out between the bars, took light and whistled softly. "Suppose we
take the red-haired hero's adventures first, from the time that he came south
to my galley and captured it and sailed to the Beaches."

I knew better now than to interrupt Charlie. I was out of reach of pen and
paper, and dared not move to get them lest I should break the current. The
gas-jet puffed and whinnied, Charlie's voice dropped almost to a whisper, and
he told a tale of the sailing of an open galley to Furdurstrandi, of sunsets
on the open sea, seen under the curve of the one sail evening after evening
when the galley's beak was notched into the centre of the sinking disc, and
"we sailed by that for we had no other guide," quoth Charlie. He spoke of a
landing on an island and explorations in its woods, where the crew killed
three men whom they found asleep under the pines. Their ghosts, Charlie said,
followed the galley, swimming and choking in the water, and the crew cast lots
and threw one of their number overboard as a sacrifice to the strange gods
whom they had offended. Then they ate sea-weed when their provisions failed,
and their legs swelled, and their leader, the red-haired man, killed two
rowers who mutinied, and after a year spent among the woods they set sail for
their own country, and a wind that never failed carried them back so safely
that they all slept at night. This and much more Charlie told. Sometimes the
voice fell so low that I could not catch the words, though every nerve was on
the strain. He spoke of their leader, the red-haired man, as a pagan speaks of
his God; for it was he who cheered them and slew them impartially as he
thought best for their needs; and it was he who steered them for three days
among floating ice, each floe crowded with strange beasts that "tried to sail
with us," said Charlie, "and we beat them back with the handles of the oars."

The gas-jet went out, a burned coal gave way, and the fire settled down with a
tiny crash to the bottom of the grate. Charlie ceased speaking, and I said no
word.

"By Jove!" he said, at last, shaking his head. "I've been staring at the fire
till I'm dizzy. What was I going to say?"

"Something about the galley."

"I remember now. It's 25 per cent. of the profits, isn't it?"

"It's anything you like when I've done the tale."

"I wanted to be sure of that. I must go now. I've, I've an appointment." And
he left me.

Had my eyes not been held I might have known that that broken muttering over
the fire was the swan-song of Charlie Mears. But I thought it the prelude to
fuller revelation. At last and at last I should cheat the Lords of Life and
Death!

When next Charlie came to me I received him with rapture. He was nervous and
embarrassed, but his eyes were very full of light, and his lips a little
parted.

"I've done a poem," he said; and then quickly: "it's the best I've ever done.
Read it." He thrust it into my hand and retreated to the window.

I groaned inwardly. It would be the work of half an hour to criticise--that is
to say praise--the poem sufficiently to please Charlie. Then I had good reason
to groan, for Charlie, discarding his favorite centipede metres, had launched
into shorter and choppier verse, and verse with a motive at the back of it.
This is what I read:

"The day is most fair, the cheery wind
 Halloos behind the hill,
 Where bends the wood as seemeth good,
 And the sapling to his will!
 Riot O wind; there is that in my blood
 That would not have thee still!

 "She gave me herself, O Earth, O Sky:
 Grey sea, she is mine alone--I
 Let the sullen boulders hear my cry,
 And rejoice tho' they be but stone!

 'Mine! I have won her O good brown earth,
 Make merry! 'Tis bard on Spring;
 Make merry; my love is doubly worth
 All worship your fields can bring!
 Let the hind that tills you feel my mirth
 At the early harrowing."

"Yes, it's the early harrowing, past a doubt," I said, with a dread at my
heart. Charlie smiled, but did not answer.

"Red cloud of the sunset, tell it abroad;
 I am victor. Greet me O Sun,
 Dominant master and absolute lord
 Over the soul of one!"

"Well?" said Charlie, looking over my shoulder.

I thought it far from well, and very evil indeed, when he silently laid a
photograph on the paper--the photograph of a girl with a curly head, and a
foolish slack mouth.

"Isn't it--isn't it wonderful?" he whispered, pink to the tips of his ears,
wrapped in the rosy mystery of first love. "I didn't know; I didn't think--it
came like a thunderclap."

"Yes. It comes like a thunderclap. Are you very happy, Charlie?"

"My God--she--she loves me!" He sat down repeating the last words to himself.
I looked at the hairless face, the narrow shoulders already bowed by desk-
work, and wondered when, where, and bow he had loved in his past lives.

"What will your mother say?" I asked, cheerfully.

"I don't care a damn what she says."

At twenty the things for which one does not care a damn should, properly, be
many, but one must not include mothers in the list. I told him this gently;
and he described Her, even as Adam must have described to the newly named
beasts the glory and tenderness and beauty of Eve. Incidentally I learned that
She was a tobacconist's assistant with a weakness for pretty dress, and had
told him four or five times already that She had never been kissed by a man
before.

Charlie spoke on, and on, and on; while I, separated from him by thousands of
years, was considering the beginnings of things. Now I understood why the
Lords of Life and Death shut the doors so carefully behind us. It is that we
may not remember our first wooings. Were it not so, our world would be without
inhabitants in a hundred years.

"Now, about that galley-story," I said, still more cheerfully, in a pause in
the rush of the speech.

Charlie looked up as though he had been hit. "The galley--what galley? Good
heavens, don't joke, man! This is serious! You don't know how serious it is!"

Grish Chunder was right. Charlie had tasted the love of woman that kills
remembrance, and the "finest story" in the world would never be written.

 *  *   *  *  *  *

  VOLUME IV UNDER THE DEODARS

  THE EDUCATION OF OTIS YEERE

 I

In the pleasant orchard-closes
 "God bless all our gains," say we;
But "May God bless all our losses,"
 Better suits with our degree.
              --The Lost Bower.
 
This is the history of a failure; but the woman who failed said that it might
be an instructive tale to put into print for the benefit of the younger
generation. The younger generation does not want instruction, being perfectly
willing to instruct if any one will listen to it. None the less, here begins
the story where every right-minded story should begin, that is to say at
Simla, where all things begin and many come to an evil end.

The mistake was due to a very clever woman making a blunder and not retrieving
it. Men are licensed to stumble, but a clever woman's mistake is outside the
regular course of Nature and Providence; since all good people know that a
woman is the only infallible thing in this world, except Government Paper of
the '70 issue, bearing interest at four and a half per cent. Yet, we have to
remember that six consecutive days of rehearsing the leading part of The
Fallen Age, at the New Gaiety Theatre where the plaster is not yet properly
dry, might have brought about an unhingement of spirits which, again, might
have led to eccentricities.

Mrs. Hauksbee came to "The Foundry" to tiffin with Mrs. Mallowe, her one bosom
friend, for she was in no sense "a woman's woman." And it was a woman's
tiffin, the door shut to all the world; and they both talked chiffons, which
is French for Mysteries.

"I've enjoyed an interval of sanity," Mrs. Hauksbee announced, after tiffin
was over and the two were comfortably settled in the little writing-room that
opened out of Mrs. Mallowe's bedroom.

"My dear girl, what has he done?" said Mrs. Mallowe, sweetly. It is noticeable
that ladies of a certain age call each other "dear girl," just as
commissioners of twenty-eight years' standing address their equals in the
Civil List as "my boy."

"There's no he in the case. Who am I that an imaginary man should be always
credited to me? Am I an Apache?"

"No, dear, but somebody's scalp is generally drying at your wigwam-door.
Soaking, rather."

This was an allusion to the Hawley Boy, who was in the habit of riding all
across Simla in the Rains, to call on Mrs. Hauksbee. That lady laughed.

"For my sins, the Aide at Tyrconnel last night told me off to The Mussuck.
Hsh! Don't laugh. One of my most devoted admirers. When the duff came--some
one really ought to teach them to make pudding at Tyrconnel--The Mussuck was
at liberty to attend to me."

"Sweet soul! I know his appetite," said Mrs. Mallowe. "Did he, oh did he,
begin his wooing?"

"By a special mercy of Providence, no. He explained his importance as a Pillar
of the Empire. I didn't laugh."

"Lucy, I don't believe you."

"Ask Captain Sangar; he was on the other side. Well, as I was saying, The
Mussuck dilated."

"I think I can see him doing it," said Mrs. Mallowe, pensively, scratching her
fox-terrier's ears.

"I was properly impressed.  Most properly. I yawned openly. 'Strict
supervision, and play them off one against the other,' said The Mussuck,
shoveling down his ice by tureenfuls, I assure you. 'That, Mrs. Hauksbee, is
the secret of our Government.'"

Mrs. Mallowe laughed long and merrily. "And what did you say?"

"Did you ever know me at loss for an answer yet? I said: 'So I have observed
in my dealings with you.' The Mussuck swelled with pride. He is coming to call
on me tomorrow. The Hawley Boy is coming too."

"'Strict supervision and play them off one against the other. That, Mrs.
Hauksbee, is the secret of our Government.' And I dare say if we could get to
The Mussuck's heart, we should find that he considers himself a man of the
world."

"As he is of the other two things. I like The Mussuck, and I won't have you
call him names. He amuses me."

"He has reformed you, too, by what appears. Explain the interval of sanity,
and hit Tim on the nose with the paper-cutter, please. That dog is too fond of
sugar. Do you take milk in yours?"

"No, thanks. Polly, I'm wearied of this life. It's hollow."

"Turn religious, then. I always said that Rome would be your fate."

"Only exchanging half a dozen attaches in red for one and in black, and if I
fasted, the wrinkles would come, and never, never go. Has it ever struck you,
dear, that I'm getting old?"

"Thanks for your courtesy. I'll return it. Ye-es we are both not exactly--how
shall I put it?"

"What we have been. 'I feel it in my bones,' as Mrs. Crossley says. Polly,
I've wasted my life."

"As how?"

"Never mind how. I feel it. I want to be a Power before I die."

"Be a Power then. You've wits enough for anything--and beauty?"

Mrs. Hauksbee pointed a teaspoon straight at her hostess. "Polly, if you heap
compliments on me like this, I shall cease to believe that you're a woman.
Tell me how I am to be a Power."

"Inform The Mussuck that he is the most fascinating and slimmest man in Asia,
and he'll tell you anything and everything you please."

"Bother The Mussuck! I mean an intellectual Power--not a gas-power. Polly, I'm
going to start a salon."

Mrs. Mallowe turned lazily on the sofa and rested her head on her hand. "Hear
the words of the Preacher, the son of Baruch," she said.

"Will you talk sensibly?"

"I will, dear, for I see that you are going to make a mistake."

"I never made a mistake in my life at least, never one that I couldn't explain
away afterward."

"Going to make a mistake," went on Mrs. Mallowe, composedly. "It is impossible
to start a salon in Simla. A bar would be much more to the point."

"Perhaps, but why? It seems so easy."

"Just what makes it so difficult. How many clever women are there in Simla?"

"Myself and yourself," said Mrs. Hauksbee, without a moment's hesitation.

"Modest woman!  Mrs. Feardon would thank you for that. And how many clever
men?"

"Oh--er--hundreds," said Mrs. Hauksbee, vaguely.

"What a fatal blunder! Not one. They are all bespoke of the Government. Take
my husband, for instance. Jack was a clever man, though I say so who
shouldn't. Government has eaten him up. All his ideas and powers of
conversation--he really used to be a good talker, even to his wife, in the old
days--are taken from him by this--this kitchen-sink of a Government. That's
the case with every man up here who is at work. I don't suppose a Russian
convict under the knout is able to amuse the rest of his gang; and all our
men-folk here are gilded convicts."

"But there are scores--"

"I know what you're going to say. Scores of idle men up on leave. I admit it,
but they are all of two objectionable sets, The Civilian who'd be delightful
if he had the military man's knowledge of the world and style, and the
military man who'd be adorable if lie had the Civilian's culture."

"Detestable word! Have Civilians Culchaw? I never studied the breed deeply."

"Don't make fun of Jack's service. Yes. They're like the teapots in the Lakka
Bazar--good material but not polished. They can't help themselves, poor dears.
A Civilian only begins to be tolerable after he has knocked about the world
for fifteen years."

"And a military man?"

"When he has had the same amount of service. The young of both species are
horrible. You would have scores of them in your salon."

"I would not!" said Mrs. Hauksbee, fiercely. "I would tell the bearer to
darwaza band them. I'd put their own colonels and commissioners at the door to
turn them away. I'd give them to the Topsham girl to play with."

"The Topsham girl would be grateful for the gift. But to go back to the salon.
Allowing that you had gathered all your men and women together, what would you
do with them? Make them talk? They would all with one accord begin to flirt.
Your salon would become a glorified Peliti's--a 'Scandal Point' by lamplight."

"There's a certain amount of wisdom in that view."

"There's all the wisdom in the world in it. Surely, twelve Simla seasons ought
to have taught you that you can't focus anything in India; and a salon, to be
any good at all, must be permanent. In two seasons your roomful would be
scattered all over Asia. We are only little bits of dirt on the hillsides--
here one day and blown down the khud the next. We have lost the art of
talking--at least our men have. We have no cohesion"--

"George Eliot in the flesh," interpolated Mrs. Hauksbee, wickedly.

"And collectively, my dear scoffer, we, men and women alike, have no
influence.

"Come into the veranda and look at the Mall!"

The two looked down on the now rapidly filling road, for all Simla was abroad
to steal a stroll between a shower and a fog.

"How do you propose to fix that river? Look! There's The Mussuck--head of
goodness knows what. He is a power in the land, though he does eat like a
costermonger. There's Colonel Blone, and General Grucher, and Sir Dugald
Delane, and Sir Henry Haughton, and Mr. Jellalatty. All Heads of Departments,
and all powerful."

"And all my fervent admirers," said Mrs. Hauksbee, piously. "Sir Henry
Haughton raves about me. But go on."

"One by one, these men are worth something. Collectively, they're just a mob
of Anglo-Indians. Who cares for what Anglo-Indians say? Your salon won't weld
the Departments together and make you mistress of India, dear. And these
creatures won't talk administrative 'shop' in a crowd--your salon--because
they are so afraid of the men in the lower ranks overhearing it. They have
forgotten what of Literature and Art they ever knew, and the women"--

"Can't talk about anything except the last Gymkhana, or the sins of their last
nurse. I was calling on Mrs. Derwills this morning."

"You admit that? They can talk to the subalterns though, and the subalterns
can talk to them. Your salon would suit their views admirably, if you
respected the religious prejudices of the country and provided plenty of kala
juggahs."

"Plenty of kala juggahs. Oh my poor little idea! Kala juggahs in a salon! But
who made you so awfully clever?"

"Perhaps I've tried myself; or perhaps I know a woman who has. I have preached
and expounded the whole matter and the conclusion thereof"--

"You needn't go on. 'Is Vanity.' Polly, I thank you. These vermin--" Mrs.
Hauksbee waved her hand from the veranda to two men in the crowd below who had
raised their hats to her--"these vermin shall not rejoice in a new Scandal
Point or an extra Peliti's. I will abandon the notion of a salon. It did seem
so tempting, though. But what shall I do? I must do something."

"Why? Are not Abana and Pharphar"--

"Jack has made you nearly as bad as himself! I want to, of course. I'm tired
of everything and everybody, from a moonlight picnic at Seepee to the
blandishments of The Mussuck."

"Yes--that comes, too, sooner or later, Have you nerve enough to make your bow
yet?"

Mrs. Hauksbee's mouth shut grimly. Then she laughed. "I think I see myself
doing it. Big pink placards on the Mall: 'Mrs. Hauksbee! Positively her last
appearance on any stage! This is to give notice!' No more dances; no more
rides; no more luncheons; no more theatricals with supper to follow; no more
sparring with one's dearest, dearest friend; no more fencing with an
inconvenient man who hasn't wit enough to clothe what he's pleased to call his
sentiments in passable speech; no more parading of The Mussuck while Mrs.
Tarkass calls all round Simla, spreading horrible stories about me? No more of
anything that is thoroughly wearying, abominable and detestable, but, all the
same, makes life worth the having. Yes! I see it all! Don't interrupt, Polly,
I'm inspired. A mauve and white striped 'cloud' round my excellent shoulders,
a seat in the fifth row of the Gaiety, and both horses sold. Delightful
vision! A comfortable armchair, situated in three different draughts, at every
ballroom; and nice, large, sensible shoes for all the couples to stumble over
as they go into the veranda! Then at supper. Can't you imagine the scene? The
greedy mob gone away. Reluctant subaltern, pink all over like a newly-powdered
baby--they really ought to tan subalterns before they are exported--Polly--
sent back by the hostess to do his duty. Slouches up to me across the room,
tugging at a glove two sizes too large for him--I hate a man who wears gloves
like overcoats--and trying to look as if he'd thought of it from the first.
'May I ah--have the pleasure 'f takin' you 'nt' supper?' Then I get up with a
hungry smile. Just like this."

"Lucy, how can you be so absurd?"

"And sweep out on his arm. So! After supper I shall go away early, you know,
because I shall be afraid of catching cold. No one will look for my 'rickshaw.
Mine, so please you! I shall stand, always with that mauve and white 'cloud'
over my head, while the wet soaks into my dear, old, venerable feet and Tom
swears and shouts for the mem-sahib's gharri. Then home to bed at half-past
eleven! Truly excellent life helped out by the visits of the Padri, just fresh
from burying somebody down below there." She pointed through the pines, toward
the Cemetery, and continued with vigorous dramatic gesture--"Listen! I see it
all down, down even to the stays! Such stays! Six-eight a pair, Polly, with
red flannel--or list is it?--that they put into the tops of those fearful
things. I can draw you a picture of them."

"Lucy, for Heaven's sake, don't go waving your arms about in that idiotic
manner! Recollect, every one can see you from the Mall."

"Let them see! They'll think I am rehearsing for The Fallen Angel. Look!
There's The Mussuck. How badly he rides. There!"

She blew a kiss to the venerable Indian administrator with infinite grace.

"Now," she continued, "he'll be chaffed about that at the Club in the delicate
manner those brutes of men affect, and the Hawley Boy will tell me all about
it--softening the details for fear of shocking me. That boy is too good to
live, Polly. I've serious thoughts of recommending him to throw up his
Commission and go into the Church. In his present frame of mind he would obey
me. Happy, happy child."

"Never again," said Mrs. Mallowe, with an affectation of indignation, "shall
you tiffin here! 'Lucindy, your behavior is scand'lus.'"

"All your fault," retorted Mrs. Hauksbee, "for suggesting such a thing as my
abdication. No! Jamais--nevaire! I will act, dance, ride, frivol, talk
scandal, dine out, and appropriate the legitimate captives of any woman I
choose until I d-r-r-rop or a better woman than I puts me to shame before all
Simla--and it's dust and ashes in my mouth while I'm doing it!"

She swept into the drawing-room, Mrs. Mallowe followed and put an arm round
her waist.

"I'm not!" said Mrs. Hauksbee, defiantly, rummaging for her handkerchief.
"I've been dining out the last ten nights, and rehearsing in the afternoon.
You'd be tired yourself. It's only because I'm tired."

Mrs. Mallowe did not offer Mrs. Hauksbee any pity or ask her to lie down, but
gave her another cup of tea, and went on with the talk.

"I've been through that too, dear," she said.

"I remember," said Mrs. Hauksbee, a gleam of fun on her face. "In '84 wasn't
it? You went out a great deal less next season."

Mrs. Mallowe smiled in a superior and Sphinxlike fashion.

"I became an Influence," said she.

"Good gracious, child, you didn't join the Theosophists and kiss Buddha's big
toe, did you? I tried to get into their set once, but they cast me out for a
skeptic--without a chance of improving my poor little mind, too."

"No, I didn't Theosophilander. Jack says"--

"Never mind Jack. What a husband says is known before. What did you do?"

"I made a lasting impression."

"So have I--for four months. But that didn't console me in the least. I hated
the man. Will you stop smiling in that inscrutable way and tell me what you
mean?"

Mrs. Mallowe told.
 * * * * * *

"And--you--mean--to--say that it is absolutely Platonic on both sides?"

"Absolutely, or I should never have taken it up."

"And his last promotion was due to you?"

Mrs. Mallowe nodded.

"And you warned him against the Topsham girl?"

Another nod.

"And told him of Sir Dugald Delane's private memo about him?"

A third nod.

"Why?"

"What a question to ask a woman! Because it amused me at first. I am proud of
my property now. If I live he shall continue to be successful. Yes, I will put
him upon the straight road to Knighthood, and everything else that a man
values. The rest depends upon himself."

"Polly, you are a most extraordinary woman."

"Not in the least. I'm concentrated, that's all. You diffuse yourself, dear;
and though all Simla knows your skill in managing a team"--

"Can't you choose a prettier word?"

"Team, of half a dozen, from The Mussuck to the Hawley Boy, you gain nothing
by it. Not even amusement."

"And you?"

"Try my recipe. Take a man, not a boy, mind, but an almost mature, unattached
man, and be this guide, philosopher, and friend. You'll find it the most
interesting occupation that you ever embarked on. It can be done--you needn't
look like that--because I've done it."

"There's an element of risk about it that makes the notion attractive. I'll
get such a man and say to him, 'Now, understand that there must be no
flirtation. Do exactly what I tell you, profit by my instruction and counsels,
and all will yet be well,' as Toole says. Is that the idea?"

"More or less," said Mrs. Mallowe with an unfathomable smile. "But be sure he
understands that there must be no flirtation."

II
                              
Dribble-dribble-trickle-trickle
What a lot of raw dust!
My dollie's had an accident
And out came all the sawdust!
           --Nursery Rhyme.

So Mrs. Hauksbee, in "The Foundry" which overlooks Simla Mall, sat at the feet
of Mrs. Mallowe and gathered wisdom. The end of the Conference was the Great
Idea upon which Mrs. Hauksbee so plumed herself.

"I warn you," said Mrs. Mallowe, beginning to repent of her suggestion, "that
the matter is not half so easy as it looks. Any woman--even the Topsham girl--
can catch a man, but very, very few know how to manage him when caught."

"My child," was the answer, "I've been a female St. Simon Stylites looking
down upon men for these--these years past. Ask The Mussuck whether I can
manage them."

Mrs. Hauksbee departed humming, "I'll go to him and say to him in manner most
ironical." Mrs. Mallowe laughed to herself. Then she grew suddenly sober. "I
wonder whether I've done well in advising that amusement? Lucy's a clever
woman, but a thought too careless."

A week later, the two met at a Monday Pop. "Well?" said Mrs. Mallowe.

"I've caught him!" said Mrs. Hauksbee; her eyes were dancing with merriment.

"Who is it, mad woman? I'm sorry I ever spoke to you about it."

"Look between the pillars. In the third row; fourth from the end. You can see
his face now. Look!"

"Otis Yeere! Of all the improbable and impossible people! I don't believe
you."

"Hsh! Wait till Mrs. Tarkass begins murdering Milton Wellings; and I'll tell
you all about it. S-s-ss! That woman's voice always reminds me of an
Underground train coming into Earl's Court with the brakes on. Now listen. It
is really Otis Yeere."

"So I see, but does it follow that he is your property?"

"He is! By right of trove. I found him, lonely and unbefriended, the very next
night after our talk, at the Dugald Delane's burra-khana. I liked his eyes,
and I talked to him. Next day he called. Next day we went for a ride together,
and today he's tied to my 'rickshaw-wheels hand and foot. You'll see when the
concert's over. He doesn't know I'm here yet."

"Thank goodness you haven't chosen a boy. What are you going to do with him,
assuming that you've got him?"

"Assuming, indeed! Does a woman--do I--ever make a mistake in that sort of
thing? First"--Mrs. Hauksbee ticked off the items ostentatiously on her little
gloved fingers--"First, my dear, I shall dress him properly. At present his
raiment is a disgrace, and he wears a dress shirt like a crumpled sheet of the
'Pioneer'. Secondly, after I have made him presentable, I shall form his
manners--his morals are above reproach."

"You seem to have discovered a great deal about him considering the shortness
of your acquaintance."

"Surely you ought to know that the first proof a man gives of his interest in
a woman is by talking to her about his own sweet self. If the woman listens
without yawning, he begins to like her. If she flatters the animal's vanity,
he ends by adoring her."

"In some cases."

"Never mind the exceptions. I know which one you are thinking of. Thirdly, and
lastly, after he is polished and made pretty, I shall, as you said, be his
guide, philosopher and friend, and he shall become a success--as great a
success as your friend. I always wondered how that man got on. Did The Mussuck
come to you with the Civil List and, dropping on one knee--no, two knees, a'
la Gibbon--hand it to you and say, 'Adorable angel, choose your friend's
appointment'?"

"Lucy, your long experiences of the Military Department have demoralized you.
One doesn't do that sort of thing on the Civil Side."

"No disrespect meant to Jack's Service, my dear. I only asked for information.
Give me three months, and see what changes I shall work in my prey."

"Go your own way since you must. But I'm sorry that I was weak enough to
suggest the amusement."

"'I am all discretion, and may be trusted to an in-finite extent,'" quoted
Mrs. Hauksbee from The Fallen Angel; and the conversation ceased with Mrs.
Tarkass's last, long-drawn war-whoop.

Her bitterest enemies--and she had many--could hardly accuse Mrs. Hauksbee of
wasting her time. Otis Yeere was one of those wandering "dumb" characters,
foredoomed through life to be nobody's property. Ten years in Her Majesty's
Bengal Civil Service, spent, for the most part, in undesirable Districts, had
given him little to be proud of, and nothing to bring confidence. Old enough
to have lost the first fine careless rapture that showers on the immature
'Stunt imaginary Commissionerships and Stars, and sends him into the collar
with coltish earnestness and abandon; too young to be yet able to look back
upon the progress he had made, and thank Providence that under the conditions
of the day he had come even so far, he stood upon the "dead-centre" of his
career. And when a man stands still, he feels the slightest impulse from
without. Fortune had ruled that Otis Yeere should be, for the first part of
his service, one of the rank and file who are ground up in the wheels of the
Administration; losing heart and soul, and mind and strength, in the process.
Until steam replaces manual power in the working of the Empire, there must
always be this percentage--must always be the men who are used up, expended,
in the mere mechanical routine. For these promotion is far off and the mill-
grind of every day very near and instant. The Secretariats know them only by
name; they are not the picked men of the Districts with the Divisions and
Collectorates awaiting them. They are simply the rank and file--the food for
fever--sharing with the ryot and the plough-bullock the honor of being the
plinth on which the State rests. The older ones have lost their aspirations;
the younger are putting theirs aside with a sigh. Both learn to endure
patiently until the end of the day. Twelve years in the rank and file, men
say, will sap the hearts of the bravest and dull the wits of the most keen.

Out of this life Otis Yeere had fled for a few months, drifting, for the sake
of a little masculine society, into Simla. When his leave was over he would
return to his swampy, sour-green, undermanned district, the native Assistant,
the native Doctor, the native Magistrate, the steaming, sweltering Station,
the ill-kempt City, and the undisguised insolence of the Municipality that
babbled away the lives of men. Life was cheap, however. The soil spawned
humanity, as it bred frogs in the Rains, and the gap of the sickness of one
season was filled to overflowing by the fecundity of the next. Otis was
unfeignedly thankful to lay down his work for a little while and escape from
the seething, whining, weakly hive, impotent to help itself, but strong in its
power to cripple, thwart, and annoy the weary-eyed man who, by official irony,
was said to be "in charge" of it.
*  *  *  *  *  *

"I knew there were women-dowdies in Bengal. They come up here sometimes. But I
didn't know that there were men-dowdies, too."

Then, for the first time, it occurred to Otis Yeere that his clothes were
rather ancestral in appearance. It will be seen from the above that his
friendship with Mrs Hauksbee had made great strides.

As that lady truthfully says, a man is never so happy as when he is talking
about himself. From Otis Yeere's lips Mrs Hauksbee, before long, learned
everything that she wished to know about the subject of her experiment;
learned what manner of life he had led in what she vaguely called "those awful
cholera districts"; learned too, but this knowledge came later, what manner of
life he had purposed to lead and what dreams he had dreamed in the year of
grace '77, before the reality had knocked the heart out of him. Very pleasant
are the shady bridle-paths round Prospect Hill for the telling of such
confidences.

"Not yet," said Mrs. Hauksbee to Mrs. Mallowe. "Not yet. I must wait until the
man is properly dressed, at least. Great Heavens, is it possible that he
doesn't know what an honor it is to be taken up by Me!"

Mrs. Hauksbee did not reckon false modesty as one of her failings.

"Always with Mrs. Hauksbee!" murmured Mrs. Mallowe, with her sweetest smile,
to Otis. "Oh you men, you men! Here are our Punjabis growling because you've
monopolized the nicest woman in Simla. They'll tear you to pieces on the Mall,
some day, Mr. Yeere."

Mrs. Mallowe rattled down-hill, having satisfied herself, by a glance through
the fringe of her sunshade, of the effect of her words.

The shot went home. Of a surety Otis Yeere was somebody in this bewildering
whirl of Simla--had monopolized the nicest woman in it and the Punjabis were
growling. The notion justified a mild glow of vanity. He had never looked upon
his acquaintance with Mrs. Hauksbee as a matter for general interest.

The knowledge of envy was a pleasant feeling to the man of no account. It was
intensified later in the day when a luncher at the Club said, spitefully,
"Well, for a debilitated Ditcher, Yeere, you are going it. Hasn't any kind
friend told you that she's the most dangerous woman in Simla?"

Yeere chuckled and passed out. When, oh when, would his new clothes be ready?
He descended into the Mall to inquire; and Mrs. Hauksbee, coming over the
Church Ridge in her 'rickshaw, looked down upon him approvingly. "He's
learning to carry himself as if he were a man, instead of a piece of
furniture, and"--she screwed up her eyes to see the better through the
sunlight--"he is a man when he holds himself like that. Oh blessed Conceit,
what should we be without you?"

With the new clothes came a new stock of self-confidence. Otis Yeere
discovered that he could enter a room without breaking into a gentle
perspiration--could cross one, even to talk to Mrs. Hauksbee, as though rooms
were meant to be crossed. He was for the first time in nine years proud of
himself, and contented with his life, satisfied with his new clothes, and
rejoicing in the friendship of Mrs. Hauksbee.

"Conceit is what the poor fellow wants," she said in confidence to Mrs.
Mallowe. "I believe they must use Civilians to plough the fields with in Lower
Bengal. You see I have to begin from the very beginning--haven't I? But you'll
admit, won't you, dear, that he is immensely improved since I took him in
hand. Only give me a little more time and he won't know himself."

Indeed, Yeere was rapidly beginning to forget what he had been. One of his own
rank and file put the matter brutally when he asked Yeere, in reference to
nothing, "And who has been making you a Member of Council, lately? You carry
the side of half a dozen of 'em."

"I--I'm awf'ly sorry. I didn't mean it, you know," said Yeere, apologetically.

"There'll be no holding you," continued the old stager, grimly. "Climb down,
Otis--climb down, and get all that beastly affectation knocked out of you with
fever! Three thousand a month wouldn't support it."

Yeere repeated the incident to Mrs. Hauksbee. He had come to look upon her as
his Mother Confessor.

"And you apologized!" she said. "Oh, shame! I hate a man who apologizes. Never
apologize for what your friend called 'side.' Never! It's a man's business to
be insolent and overbearing until he meets with a stronger. Now, you bad boy,
listen to me."

Simply and straightforwardly, as the 'rickshaw loitered round Jakko, Mrs.
Hauksbee preached to Otis Yeere the Great Gospel of Conceit, illustrating it
with living pictures encountered during their Sunday afternoon stroll.

"Good gracious!" she ended, with the personal argument, "you'll apologize next
for being my attache?"

"Never!" said Otis Yeere. "That's another thing altogether. I shall always
be"--

"What's coming?" thought Mrs. Hauksbee.

"Proud of that," said Otis.

"Safe for the present," she said to herself.

"But I'm afraid I have grown conceited. Like Jeshurun, you know. When he waxed
fat, then he kicked. It's the having no worry on one's mind and the Hill air,
I suppose."

"Hill air, indeed!" said Mrs. Hauksbee to herself. "He'd have been hiding in
the Club till the last day of his leave, if I hadn't discovered him." And
aloud--"Why shouldn't you be? You have every right to."

"I! Why?"

"Oh, hundreds of things. I'm not going to waste this lovely afternoon by
explaining; but I know you have. What was that heap of manuscript you showed
me about the grammar of the aboriginal--what's their names?"

"Gullals. A piece of nonsense. I've far too much work to do to bother over
Gullals now. You should see my District. Come down with your husband some day
and I'll show you round. Such a lovely place in the Rains! A sheet of water
with the railway-embankment and the snakes sticking out, and, in the summer,
green flies and green squash. The people would die of fear if you shook a
dogwhip at 'em. But they know you're forbidden to do that, so they conspire to
make your life a burden to you. My District's worked by some man at Darjiling,
on the strength of u native pleader's false reports. Oh, it's a heavenly
place!"

Otis Yeere laughed bitterly.

"There's not the least necessity that you should stay in it. Why do you?"

"Because I must. How'm I to get out of it?"

"How! In a hundred and fifty ways. If there weren't so many people on the
road, I'd like to box your ears. Ask, my dear boy, ask! Look, There is young
Hexarly with six years' service and half your talents. He asked for what he
wanted, and he got it. See, down by the Convent! There's McArthurson who has
come to his present position by asking--sheer, downright asking--after he had
pushed himself out of the rank and file. One man is as good as another in your
service--believe me. I've seen Simla for more seasons than I care to think
about. Do you suppose men are chosen for appointments because of their special
fitness beforehand? You have all passed a high test--what do you call it?--in
the beginning, and, except for the few who have gone altogether to the bad,
you can all work hard. Asking does the rest. Call it cheek, call it insolence,
call it anything you like, but ask! Men argue--yes, I know what men say--that
a man, by the mere audacity of his request, must have some good in him. A weak
man doesn't say: 'Give me this and that.' He whines 'Why haven't I been given
this and that?' If you were in the Army, I should say learn to spin plates or
play a tambourine with your toes. As it is--ask! You belong to a Service that
ought to be able to command the Channel Fleet, or set a leg at twenty minutes'
notice, and yet you hesitate over asking to escape from a squashy green
district where you admit you are not master. Drop the Bengal Government
altogether. Even Darjiling is a little out-of-the-way hole. I was there once,
and the rents were extortionate. Assert yourself. Get the Government of India
to take you over. Try to get on the Frontier, where every man has a grand
chance if he can trust himself. Go somewhere! Do something! You have twice the
wits and three times the presence of the men up here, and, and"--

Mrs. Hauksbee paused for breath; then continued--"and in any way you look at
it, you ought to. You who could go so far!"

"I don't know," said Yeere, rather taken aback by the unexpected eloquence. "1
haven't such a good opinion of myself."

It was not strictly Platonic, hut it was Policy. Mrs. Hauksbee laid her hand
lightly upon the ungloved paw that rested on the turned-back 'rickshaw hood,
and, looking the man full in the face, said tenderly, almost too tenderly, 'I
believe in you if you mistrust yourself. Is that enough, my friend?"

"It is enough," answered Otis, very solemnly.

He was silent for a long time, redreaming the dreams that he had dreamed eight
years ago, but through them all ran, as sheet-lightning through golden cloud,
the light of Mrs. Hauksbee's violet eyes.

Curious and impenetrable are the mazes of Simla life--the only existence in
this desolate land worth the living. Gradually it went abroad among men and
women, in the pauses between dance, play and Gymkhana, that Otis Yeere, the
man with the newly-lit light of self-confidence in his eyes, had "done
something decent" in the wilds whence he came. He had brought an erring
Municipality to reason, appropriated the funds on his own responsibility, and
saved the lives of hundreds, He knew more about the Gullals than any living
man. Had a vast knowledge of the aboriginal tribes; was, in spite of his
juniority, the greatest authority on the aboriginal Gullals. No one quite knew
who or what the Gullals were till The Mussuck, who had been calling on Mrs.
Hauksbee, and prided himself upon picking people's brains, explained they were
a tribe of ferocious hillmen, somewhere near Sikkim, whose friendship even the
Great Indian Empire would find it worth her while to secure. Now we know that
Otis Yeere had showed Mrs. Hauksbee his MS notes of six years' standing on the
same Gullals. He had told her, too, how, sick and shaken with the fever their
negligence had bred, crippled by the loss of his pet clerk, and savagely angry
at the desolation in his charge, he had once damned the collective eyes of his
"intelligent local board" for a set of haramzadas. Which act of "brutal and
tyrannous oppression" won him a Reprimand Royal from the Bengal Government;
but in the anecdote as amended for Northern consumption we find no record of
this. Hence we are forced to conclude that Mrs. Hauksbee "edited" his
reminiscences before sowing them in idle ears, ready, as she well knew, to
exaggerate good or evil. And Otis Yeere bore himself as befitted the hero of
many tales.

"You can talk to me when you don't fall into a brown study. Talk now, and talk
your brightest and best," said Mrs. Hauksbee.

Otis needed no spur. Look to a man who has the counsel of a woman of or above
the world to back him. So long as he keeps his head, he can meet both sexes on
equal ground--an advantage never intended by Providence, who fashioned Man on
one day and Woman on another, in sign that neither should know more than a
very little of the other's life. Such a man goes far, or, the counsel being
withdrawn, collapses suddenly while his world seeks the reason.

Generalled by Mrs. Hauksbee who, again, had all Mrs. Mallowe's wisdom at her
disposal, proud of himself and, in the end, believing in himself because he
was believed in, Otis Yeere stood ready for any fortune that might befall,
certain that it would be good. He would fight for his own hand, and intended
that this second struggle should lead to better issue than the first helpless
surrender of the bewildered 'Stunt.

What might have happened, it is impossible to say. This lamentable thing
befell, bred directly by a statement of Mrs. Hauksbee that she would spend the
next season in Darjiling.

"Are you certain of that?" said Otis Yeere.

"Quite. We're writing about a house now.

Otis Yeere "stopped dead," as Mrs. Hauksbee put it in discussing the relapse
with Mrs. Mallowe.

"He has behaved," she said, angrily, "just like Captain Kerrington's pony--
only Otis is a donkey--at the last Gymkhana. Planted his forefeet and refused
to go on another step. Polly, my man's going to disappoint me. What shall I
do?"

As a rule, Mrs. Mallowe does not approve of staring, but on this occasion she
opened her eyes to the utmost.

"You have managed cleverly so far," she said. "Speak to him, and ask him what
he means."

'I will--at tonight's dance."

"No-o, not at a dance," said Mrs. Mallowe, cautiously. "Men are never
themselves quite at dances. Better wait till tomorrow morning."

"Nonsense. If he's going to revert in this insane way, there isn't a day to
lose. Are you going? No? Then sit up for me, there's a dear. I shan't stay
longer than supper under any circumstances."

Mrs. Mallowe waited through the evening, looking long and earnestly into the
fire, and sometimes smiling to herself.
* * * *

"Oh! oh! oh! The man's an idiot! A raving, positive idiot! I'm sorry I ever
saw him!"

Mrs. Hauksbee burst into Mrs. Mallowe's house, at midnight, almost in tears.

"What in the world has happened?" said Mrs. Mallowe, but her eyes showed that
she had guessed an answer.

"Happened! Everything has happened! He was there. I went to him and said,
'Now, what does this nonsense mean?' Don't laugh, dear, I can't bear it. But
you know what I mean I said. Then it was a square, and I sat it out with him
and wanted an explanation, and he said--Oh! I haven't patience with such
idiots! You know what I said about going to Darjiling next year? It doesn't
matter to me where I go. I'd have changed the Station and lost the rent to
have saved this. He said, in so many words, that he wasn't going to try to
work up any more, because--because he would be shifted into a province away
from Darjiling, and his own District, where these creatures are, is within a
day's journey"--

"Ah-hh!" said Mrs. Mallowe, in a tone of one who has successfully tracked an
obscure word through a large dictionary.

"Did you ever hear of anything so mad--so absurd? And he had the ball at his
feet. He had only to kick it! I would have made him anything! Anything in the
wide world. He could have gone to the world's end. I would have helped him. I
made him, didn't I, Polly? Didn't I create that man? Doesn't he owe everything
to me? And to reward me, just when everything was nicely arranged, by this
lunacy that spoiled everything!"

"Very few men understand your devotion thoroughly."

"Oh, Polly, don't laugh at me! I give men up from this hour. I could have
killed him then and there. What right had this man--this Thing I had picked
out of his filthy paddy-fields--to make love to me?"

"He did that, did he?"

"He did. I don't remember half he said, I was so angry. Oh, but such a funny
thing happened! I can't help laughing at it now, though I felt nearly ready to
cry with rage. He raved and I stormed--I'm afraid we must have made an awful
noise in our kala juggah. Protect my character, dear, if it's all over Simla
by tomorrow--and then he bobbed forward in the middle of this insanity--I
firmly believe the man's demented--and kissed me!"

"Morals above reproach," purred Mrs. Mallowe.

"So they were--so they are! It was the most absurd kiss. I don't believe he'd
ever kissed a woman in his life before. I threw my head back, and it was a
sort of slidy, pecking dab, just on the end of the chin--here." Mrs. Hauksbee
tapped her masculine little chin with her fan. "Then, of course, I was
furiously angry, and told him that he was no gentleman, and I was sorry I'd
ever met him, and so on. He was crushed so easily that I couldn't be very
angry. Then I came away straight to you."

"Was this before or after supper?"

"Oh! before--oceans before. Isn't it perfectly disgusting?"

"Let me think. I withhold judgment till tomorrow. Morning brings counsel."

But morning brought only a servant with a dainty bouquet of Annandale roses
for Mrs. Hauksbee to wear at the dance at Viceregal Lodge that night.

"He doesn't seem to be very penitent," said Mrs. Mallowe. "What's the billet-
doux in the centre?"

Mrs. Hauksbee opened the neatly folded note,--another accomplishment that she
had taught Otis,--read it, and groaned tragically.

"Last wreck of a feeble intellect! Poetry! Is it his own, do you think? Oh,
that I ever built my hopes on such a maudlin idiot!"

"No. It's a quotation from Mrs. Browning, and, in view of the facts of the
case, as Jack says, uncommonly well chosen. Listen:

"'Sweet thou has trod on a heart--
 Pass! There's a world full of men
And women as fair as thou art,
 Must do such things now and then.

"'Thou only hast stepped unaware--
 Malice not one can impute;
And why should a heart have been there,
 In the way of a fair woman's foot?'

"I didn't--I didn't--I didn't! " said Mrs. Hauksbee, angrily, her eyes filling
with tears; "there was no malice at all. Oh, it's too vexatious!"

"You've misunderstood the compliment," said Mrs. Mallowe. "He clears you
completely and--ahem--I should think by this, that he has cleared completely
too. My experience of men is that when they begin to quote poetry, they are
going to flit. Like swans singing before they die, you know."

'Polly, you take my sorrows in a most unfeeling way."

"Do I?" Is it so terrible? If he's hurt your vanity, I should say that you've
done a certain amount of damage to his heart."

"Oh, you never can tell about a man! said Mrs. Hauksbee, with deep scorn.
*  *  *  *  *

Reviewing the matter as an impartial outsider, it strikes me that I'm about
the only person who has profited by the education of Otis Yeere. It comes to
twenty-seven pages and bittock.



AT THE PIT'S MOUTH

Men say it was a stolen tide--
 The Lord that sent it he knows all,
But in mine ear will aye abide
 The message that the bells let fall,
And awesome bells they were to me,
That in the dark rang, "Enderby."
              --Jean Ingelow.

Once upon a time there was a man and his Wife and a Tertium Quid.

All three were unwise, but the Wife was the unwisest. The Man should have
looked after his Wife, who should have avoided the Tertium Quid, who, again,
should have married a wife of his own, after clean and open flirtations, to
which nobody can possibly object, round Jakko or Observatory Hill. When you
see a young man with his pony in a white lather, and his hat on the back of
his head flying down-hill at fifteen miles an hour to meet a girl who will be
properly surprised to meet him, you naturally approve of that young man, and
wish him Staff Appointments, and take an interest in his welfare, and, as the
proper time comes, give them sugar-tongs or side-saddles, according to your
means and generosity.

The Tertium Quid flew down-hill on horseback, but it was to meet the Man's
Wife; and when he flew up-hill it was for the same end. The Man was in the
Plains, earning money for his Wife to spend on dresses and four-hundred-rupee
bracelets, and inexpensive luxuries of that kind. He worked very hard, and
sent her a letter or a post-card daily. She also wrote to him daily, and said
that she was longing for him to come up to Simla. The Tertium Quid used to
lean over her shoulder and laugh as she wrote the notes. Then the two would
ride to the Post Office together.

Now, Simla is a strange place and its customs are peculiar; nor is any man who
has not spent at least ten seasons there qualified to pass judgment on
circumstantial evidence. which is the most untrustworthy in the Courts. For
these reasons, and for others which need not appear, I decline to state
positively whether there was anything irretrievably wrong in the relations
between the Man's Wife and the Tertium Quid. If there was, and hereon you must
form your own opinion, it was the Man's Wife's fault. She was kittenish in her
manners, wearing generally an air of soft and fluffy innocence. But she was
deadly learned and evil-instructed; and, now and again, when the mask dropped,
men saw this, shuddered and almost drew back. Men are occasionally particular,
and the least particular men are always the most exacting.

Simla is eccentric in its fashion of tearing friendships. Certain attachments
which have set and crystallized through half a dozen seasons acquire almost
the sanctity of the marriage bond, and are revered as such. Again, certain
attachments equally old, and, to all appearance, equally venerable, never seem
to win any recognized official status; while a chance-sprung acquaintance now
two months born, steps into the place which by right belongs to the senior.
There is no law reducible to print which regulates these affairs.

Some people have a gift which secures them infinite toleration, and others
have not. The Man's Wife had not. If she looked over the garden wall, for
instance, women taxed her with stealing their husbands. She complained
pathetically that she was not allowed to choose her own friends. When she put
up her big white muff to her lips, and gazed over it and under her eyebrows at
you as she said this thing, you felt that she had been infamously misjudged,
and that all the other women's instincts were all wrong; which was absurd. She
was not allowed to own the Tertium Quid in peace; and was so strangely
constructed that she would not have enjoyed peace had she been so permitted.
She preferred some semblance of intrigue to cloak even her most commonplace
actions.

After two months of riding, first round Jakko, then Elysium, then Summer Hill,
then Observatory Hill, then under Jutogh, and lastly up and down the Cart Road
as far as the Tara Devi gap in the dusk, she said to the Tertium Quid, "Frank,
people say we are too much together, and people are so horrid."

The Tertium Quid pulled his moustache, and replied that horrid people were
unworthy of the consideration of nice people.

"But they have done more than talk--they have written--written to my hubby--
I'm sure of it," said the Man's Wife, and she pulled a letter from her husband
out of her saddle-pocket and gave it to the Tertium Quid.

It was an honest letter, written by an honest man, then stewing in the Plains
on two hundred rupees a month (for he allowed his wife eight hundred and
fifty), and in a silk banian and cotton trousers. It is said that, perhaps,
she had no thought of the unwisdom of allowing her name to be so generally
coupled with the Tertium Quid's; that she was too much of a child to
understand the dangers of that sort of thing; that he, her husband, was the
last man in the world to interfere jealously with her little amusements and
interests, but that it would be better were she to drop the Tertium Quid
quietly and for her husband's sake. The letter was sweetened with many pretty
little pet names, and it amused the Tertium Quid considerably. He and She
laughed over it, so that you, fifty yards away, could see their shoulders
shaking while the horses slouched along side by side.

Their conversation was not worth reporting. The upshot of it was that, next
day, no one saw the Man's Wife and the Tertium Quid together. They had both
gone down to the Cemetery, which, as a rule, is only visited officially by the
inhabitants of Simla.

A Simla funeral with the clergyman riding, the mourners riding, and the coffin
creaking as it swings between the bearers, is one of the most depressing
things on this earth, particularly when the procession passes under the wet,
dank dip beneath the Rockcliffe Hotel, where the sun is shut out and all the
hill streams are wailing and weeping together as they go down the valleys

Occasionally folk tend the graves, but we in India shift and are transferred
so often that, at the end of the second year, the Dead have no friends--only
acquaintances who are far too busy amusing themselves up the hill to attend to
old partners. The idea of using a Cemetery as a rendezvous is distinctly a
feminine one. A man would have said simply "Let people talk. We'll go down the
Mall." A woman is made differently, especially if she be such a woman as the
Man's Wife. She and the Tertium Quid enjoyed each other's society among the
graves of men and women whom they had known and danced with aforetime.

They used to take a big horse-blanket and sit on the grass a little to the
left of the lower end, where there is a dip in the ground and where the
occupied graves stop short and the ready-made ones are not ready. Each well-
regulated India Cemetery keeps half a dozen graves permanently open for
contingencies and incidental wear and tear. In the Hills these are more
usually baby's size, because children who come up weakened and sick from the
Plains often succumb to the effects of the Rains in the Hills or get pneumonia
from their ayahs taking them through damp pine-woods after the sun has set. In
Cantonments, of course, the man's size is more in request; these arrangements
varying with the climate and population.

One day when the Man's Wife and the Tertium Quid had just arrived in the
Cemetery, they saw some coolies breaking ground. They had marked out a full-
size grave, and the Tertium Quid asked them whether any Sahib was sick. They
said that they did not know; but it was an order that they should dig a
Sahib's grave.

"Work away," said the Tertium Quid, "and let's see how it's done."

The coolies worked away, and the Man's Wife and the Tertium Quid watched and
talked for a couple of hours while the grave was being deepened Then a coolie,
taking the earth in blankets as it was thrown up, jumped over the grave.

"That's queer," said the Tertium Quid. "Where's my ulster?"

"What's queer?" said the Man's Wife.

"I have got a chill down my back just as if a goose had walked over my grave."

"Why do you look at the thing, then?" said the Man's Wife. "Let us go."

The Tertium Quid stood at the head of the grave, and stared without answering
for a space. Then he said, dropping a pebble down, "It is nasty and cold;
horribly cold. I don't think I shall come to the Cemetery any more. I don't
think grave-digging is cheerful."

The two talked and agreed that the Cemetery was depressing. They also arranged
for a ride next day out from the Cemetery through the Mashobra Tunnel up to
Fagoo and back, because all the world was going to a garden-party at Viceregal
Lodge, and all the people of Mashobra would go too.

Coming up the Cemetery road, the Tertium Quid's horse tried to bolt up hill,
being tired with standing so long, and managed to strain a back sinew.

"I shall have to take the mare tomorrow," said the Tertium Quid, "and she will
stand nothing heavier than a snaffle."

They made their arrangements to meet in the Cemetery, after allowing all the
Mashobra people time to pass into Simla. That night it rained heavily, and
next day, when the Tertium Quid came to the trysting-place, he saw that the
new grave had a foot of water in it, the ground being a tough and sour clay.

"'Jove! That looks beastly," said the Tertium Quid. "Fancy being boarded up
and dropped into that well!"

They then started off to Fagoo, the mare playing with the snaffle and picking
her way as though she were shod with satin, and the sun shining divinely. The
road below Mashobra to Fagoo is officially styled the Himalayan-Thibet Road;
but in spite of its name it is not much more than six feet wide in most
places, and the drop into the valley below must be anything between one and
two thousand feet.

"Now we're going to Thibet," said the Man's Wife merrily, as the horses drew
near to Fagoo. She was riding on the cliff-side.

"Into Thibet," said the Tertium Quid, "ever so far from people who say horrid
things, and hubbies who write stupid letters. With you--to the end of the
world!"

A coolie carrying a log of wood came round a corner, and the mare went wide to
avoid him--forefeet in and haunches out, as a sensible mare should go.

"To the world's end," said the Man's Wife, and looked unspeakable things over
her near shoulder at the Tertium Quid.

He was smiling, but, while she looked, the smile froze stiff as it were on his
face, and changed to a nervous grin--the sort of grin men wear when they are
not quite easy in their saddles. The mare seemed to be sinking by the stem,
and her nostrils cracked while she was trying to realize what was happening.
The rain of the night before had rotted the drop-side of the Himalayan-Thibet
Road, and it was giving way under her. "What are you doing?" said the Man's
Wife. The Tertium Quid gave no answer. He grinned nervously and set his spurs
into the mare, who rapped with her forefeet on the road, and the struggle
began. The Man's Wife screamed, "Oh, Frank, get off!"

But the Tertium Quid was glued to the saddle--his face blue and white--and he
looked into the Man's Wife's eyes. Then the Man's Wife clutched at the mare's
head and caught her by the nose instead of the bridle. The brute threw up her
head and went down with a scream, the Tertium Quid upon her, and the nervous
grin still set on his face.

The Man's Wife heard the tinkle-tinkle of little stones and loose earth
falling off the roadway, and the sliding roar of the man and horse going down.
Then everything was quiet, and she called on Frank to leave his mare and walk
up. But Frank did not answer. He was underneath the mare, nine hundred feet
below, spoiling a patch of Indian corn.

As the revellers came hack from Viceregal Lodge in the mists of the evening,
they met a temporarily insane woman, on a temporarily mad horse, swinging
round the corners, with her eyes and her mouth open, and her head like the
head of the Medusa. She was stopped by a man at the risk of his life, and
taken out of the saddle, a limp heap, and put on the bank to explain herself.
This wasted twenty minutes, and then she was sent home in a lady's 'rickshaw,
still with her mouth open and her hands picking at her riding-gloves.

She was in bed through the following three days, which were rainy; so she
missed attending the funeral of the Tertium Quid, who was lowered into
eighteen inches of water, instead of the twelve to which he had first
objected.



A WAYSIDE COMEDY

Because to every purpose there is time and judgment, therefore the misery
of man is great upon him.
            --Eccles. viii. 6.

Fate and the Government of India have turned the Station of Kashima into a
prison; and, because there is no help for the poor souls who are now lying
there in torment, I write this story, praying that the Government of India may
be moved to scatter the European population to the four winds.

Kashima is bound on all sides by the rock-tipped circle of the Dosehri hills.
In Spring, it is ablaze with roses; in Summer, the roses die and the hot winds
blow from the hills; in Autumn, the white mists from the hills cover the place
as with water; and in Winter the frosts nip everything young and tender to
earth-level. There is but one view in Kashima--a stretch of perfectly flat
pasture and plough-land, running up to the grey-blue scrub of the Dosehri
hills.

There are no amusements, except snipe and tiger shooting; but the tigers have
been long since hunted from their lairs in the rock-caves, and the snipe only
come once a year. Narkarra--one hundred and forty-three miles by road--is the
nearest station to Kashima. But Kashima never goes to Narkarra, where there
are at least twelve English people. It stays within the circle of the Dosehri
hills.

All Kashima acquits Mrs. Vansuythen of any intention to do harm; but all
Kashima knows that she, and she alone, brought about their pain.

Boulte, the Engineer, Mrs. Boulte, and Captain Kurrell know this. They are the
English population of Kashima, if we except Major Vansuythen, who is of no
importance whatever, and Mrs. Vansuythen, who is the most important of all.

You must remember, though you will not understand, that all laws weaken in a
small and hidden community where there is no public opinion. When a man is
absolutely alone in a Station he runs a certain risk of falling into evil
ways. The risk is multiplied by every addition to the population up to twelve-
-the Jury-number. After that, fear and consequent restraint begin, and human
action becomes less grotesquely jerky.

There was deep peace in Kashima till Mrs. Vansuythen arrived. She was a
charming woman, every one said so everywhere; and she charmed every one. In
spite of this, or, perhaps, because of this, since Fate is so perverse, she
cared only for one man, and he was Major Vansuythen. Had she been plain or
stupid, this matter would have been intelligible to Kashima. But she was a
fair woman, with very still grey eyes, the color of a lake just before the
light of the sun touches it. No man who had seen those eyes, could, later on,
explain what fashion of woman she was to look upon. The eyes dazzled him. Her
own sex said that she was "not bad looking, but spoiled by pretending to be so
grave." And yet her gravity was natural It was not her habit to smile. She
merely went through life, looking at those who passed; and the women objected
while the men fell down and worshipped.

She knows and is deeply sorry for the evil she has done to Kashima; but Major
Vansuythen cannot understand why Mrs. Boulte does not drop in to afternoon tea
at least three times a week. "When there are only two women in one Station,
they ought to see a great deal of each other," says Major Vansuythen.

Long and long before ever Mrs. Vansuythen came out of those far-away places
where there is society and amusement, Kurrell had discovered that Mrs. Boulte
was the one woman in the world for him and--you dare not blame them. Kashima
was as out of the world as Heaven or the Other Place, and the Dosehri hills
kept their secret well. Boulte had no concern in the matter. He was in camp
for a fortnight at a time. He was a hard, heavy man, and neither Mrs. Boulte
nor Kurrell pitied him. They had all Kashima and each other for their very,
very own; and Kashima was the Garden of Eden in those days. When Boulte
returned from his wanderings he would slap Kurrell between the shoulders and
call him "old fellow," and the three would dine together. Kashima was happy
then when the judgment of God seemed almost as distant as Narkarra or the
railway that ran down to the sea. But the Government sent Major Vansuythen to
Kashima, and with him came his wife.

The etiquette of Kashima is much the same as that of a desert island. When a
stranger is cast away there, all hands go down to the shore to make him
welcome. Kashima assembled at the masonry platform close to the Narkarra Road,
and spread tea for the Vansuythens.  That ceremony was reckoned a formal call,
and made them free of the Station, its rights and privileges. When the
Vansuythens were settled down, they gave a tiny housewarming to all Kashima;
and that made Kashima free of their house, according to the immemorial usage
of the Station.

Then the Rains came, when no one could go into camp, and the Narkarra Road was
washed away by the Kasun River, and in the cup-like pastures of Kashima the
cattle waded knee-deep. The clouds dropped down from the Dosehri hills and
covered everything.

At the end of the Rains, Boulte's manner toward his wife changed and became
demonstratively affectionate. They had been married twelve years, and the
change startled Mrs. Boulte, who hated her husband with the hate of a woman
who has met with nothing but kindness from her mate, and, in the teeth of this
kindness, had done him a great wrong. Moreover, she had her own trouble to
fight with--her watch to keep over her own property, Kurrell. For two months
the Rains had hidden the Dosehri hills and many other things besides; but when
they lifted, they showed Mrs. Boulte that her man among men, her Ted--for she
called him Ted in the old days when Boulte was out of earshot--was slipping
the links of the allegiance.

"The Vansuythen Woman has taken him," Mrs. Boulte said to herself; and when
Boulte was away, wept over her belief, in the face of the over-vehement
blandishments of Ted. Sorrow in Kashima is as fortunate as Love, because there
is nothing to weaken it save the flight of Time. Mrs. Boulte had never
breathed her suspicion to Kurrell because she was not certain; and her nature
led her to be very certain before she took steps in any direction. That is why
she behaved as she did.

Boulte came into the house one evening, and leaned against the door-posts of
the drawing-room, chewing his moustache. Mrs. Boulte was putting some flowers
into a vase. There is a pretence of civilization even in Kashima.

"Little woman," said Boulte, quietly, "do you care for me?"

"Immensely," said she, with a laugh. "Can you ask it?"

"But I'm serious," said Boulte. "Do you care for me?"

Mrs. Boulte dropped the flowers, and turned round quickly. "Do you want an
honest answer?"

"Ye-es, I've asked for it."

Mrs. Boulte spoke in a low, even voice for five minutes, very distinctly, that
there might be no misunderstanding her meaning. When Samson broke the pillars
of Gaza, he did a little thing, and one not to be compared to the deliberate
pulling down of a woman's homestead about her own ears. There was no wise
female friend to advise Mrs. Boulte, the singularly cautious wife, to hold her
hand. She struck at Boulte's heart, because her own was sick with suspicion of
Kurrell, and worn out with the long strain of watching alone through the
Rains. There was no plan or purpose in her speaking. The sentences made
themselves; and Boulte listened leaning against the door-post with his hands
in his pockets. When all was over, and Mrs. Boulte began to breathe through
her nose before breaking out into tears, he laughed and stared straight in
front of him at the Dosehri hills.

"Is that all?" be said. "Thanks, I only wanted to know, you know."

"What are you going to do?" said the woman, between her sobs.

"Do! Nothing. What should I do? Kill Kurrell or send you Home, or apply for
leave to get a divorce? It's two days' dak into Narkarra." He laughed again
and went on: "I'll tell you what you can do. You can ask Kurrell to dinner
tomorrow--no, on Thursday, that will allow you time to pack--and you can bolt
with him. I give you my word I won't follow."

He took up his helmet and went out of the room, and Mrs. Boulte sat till the
moonlight streaked the floor, thinking and thinking and thinking. She had done
her best upon the spur of the moment to pull the house down; but it would not
fall. Moreover, she could not understand her husband, and she was afraid. Then
the folly of her useless truthfulness struck her, and she was ashamed to write
to Kurrell, saying: "I have gone mad and told everything. My husband says that
I am free to elope with you. Get a dak for Thursday, and we will fly after
dinner." There was a cold-bloodedness about that procedure which did not
appeal to her. So she sat still in her own house and thought.

At dinner-time Boulte came back from his walk, white and worn and haggard, and
the woman was touched at his distress. As the evening wore on, she muttered
some expression of sorrow, something approaching to contrition. Boulte came
out of a brown study and said, "Oh, that! I wasn't thinking about that. By the
way, what does Kurrell say to the elopement?"

"I haven't seen him," said Mrs. Boulte. "Good God! is that all?"

But Boulte was not listening, and her sentence ended in a gulp.

The next day brought no comfort to Mrs. Boulte, for Kurrell did not appear,
and the new life that she, in the five minutes' madness of the previous
evening, had hoped to build out of the ruins of the old, seemed to be no
nearer.

Boulte ate his breakfast, advised her to see her Arab pony fed in the veranda,
and went out. The morning wore through, and at midday the tension became
unendurable. Mrs. Boulte could not cry. She had finished her crying in the
night, and now she did not want to be left alone. Perhaps the Vansuythen woman
would talk to her; and, since talking opens the heart, perhaps there might be
some comfort to be found in her company. She was the only other woman in the
Station.

In Kashima there are no regular calling-hours. Every one can drop in upon
every one else at pleasure. Mrs. Boulte put on a big terai hat, and walked
across to the Vansuythens's house to borrow last week's Queen. The two
compounds touched, and instead of going up the drive, she crossed through the
gap in the cactus-hedge, entering the house from the back. As she passed
through the dining-room, she heard, behind the purdah that cloaked the
drawing-room door, her husband's voice, saying--"But on my Honor! On my Soul
and Honor, I tell you she doesn't care for me. She told me so last night. I
would have told you then if Vansuythen hadn't been with you. If it is for her
sake that you'll have nothing to say to me, you can make your mind easy. It's
Kurrell'

"What?" said Mrs. Vansuythen, with an hysterical little laugh. "Kurrell! Oh,
it can't be. You two must have made some horrible mistake. Perhaps you--you
lost your temper, or misunderstood, or something. Things can't be as wrong as
you say."

Mrs. Vansuythen had shifted her defence to avoid the man's pleading, and was
desperately trying to keep him to a side-issue.

"There must be some mistake," she insisted, "and it can be all put right
again."

Boulte laughed grimly.

"It can't be Captain Kurrell! He told me that he had never taken the least--
the least interest in your wife, Mr. Boulte. Oh, do listen! He said he had
not. He swore he had not," said Mrs. Vansuythen.

The purdah rustled, and the speech was cut short by the entry of a little,
thin woman with big rings round her eyes. Mrs. Vansuythen stood up with a
gasp.

"What was that you said?" asked Mrs. Boulte. "Never mind that man. What did
Ted say to you? What did he say to you? What did he say to you?"

Mrs. Vansuythen sat down helplessly on the sofa, overborne by the trouble of
her questioner.

"He said--I can't remember exactly what he said--but I understood him to say--
that is--But, really, Mrs. Boulte, isn't it rather a strange question?"

"Will you tell me what he said?" repeated Mrs. Boulte.

Even a tiger will fly before a bear robbed of her whelps, and Mrs. Vansuythen
was only an ordinarily good woman. She began in a sort of desperation: "Well,
he said that he never cared for you at all, and, of course, there was not the
least reason why he should have, and--and--that was all."

"You said he swore he had not cared for me. Was that true?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Vansuythen, very softly.

Mrs. Boulte wavered for an instant where she stood, and then fell forward
fainting.

"What did I tell you?" said Boulte, as though the conversation had been
unbroken. "You can see for yourself she cares for him." The light began to
break into his dull mind, and he went on--"And he--what was he saying to you?"

But Mrs. Vansuythen, with no heart for explanations or impassioned
protestations, was kneeling over Mrs. Boulte.

"Oh, you brute!" she cried. "Are all men like this? Help me to get her into my
room--and her face is cut against the table. Oh, will you be quiet, and help
me to carry her? I hate you, and I hate Captain Kurrell. Lift her up carefully
and now--go! Go away!"

Boulte carried his wife into Mrs. Vansuythen's bedroom and departed before the
storm of that lady's wrath and disgust, impenitent and burning with jealousy.
Kurrell had been making love to Mrs. Vansuythen--would do Vansuythen as great
a wrong as he had done Boulte, who caught himself considering whether Mrs.
Vansuythen would faint if she discovered that the man she loved had foresworn
her.

In the middle of these meditations, Kurrell came cantering along the road and
pulled up with a cheery, "Good mornin'. 'Been mashing Mrs. Vansuythen as
usual, eh? Bad thing for a sober, married man, that. What will Mrs Boulte
say?"

Boulte raised his head and said, slowly, "Oh, you liar!"

Kurrell's face changed. "What's that?" he asked, quickly.

"Nothing much," said Boulte. "Has my wife told you that you two are free to go
off whenever you please? She has been good enough to explain the situation to
me. You've been a true friend to me, Kurrell--old man--haven't you?"

Kurrell groaned, and tried to frame some sort of idiotic sentence about being
willing to give "satisfaction." But his interest in the woman was dead, had
died out in the Rains, and, mentally, he was abusing her for her amazing
indiscretion. It would have been so easy to have broken off the thing gently
and by degrees, and now he was saddled with--Boulte's voice recalled him.

"I don't think I should get any satisfaction from killing you, and I'm pretty
sure you'd get none from killing me."

Then in a querulous tone, ludicrously disproportioned to his wrongs, Boulte
added--"'Seems rather a pity that you haven't the decency to keep to the
woman, now you've got her. You've been a true friend to her too, haven't you?"

Kurrell stared long and gravely. The situation was getting beyond him.

"What do you mean?" he said.

Boulte answered, more to himself than the questioner: 'My wife came over to
Mrs. Vansuythen's just now; and it seems you'd been telling Mrs. Vansuythen
that you'd never cared for Emma. I suppose you lied, as usual. What had Mrs.
Vansuythen to do with you, or you with her? Try to speak the truth for once in
a way."

Kurrell took the double insult without wincing, and replied by another
question: "Go on. What happened?"

"Emma fainted," said Boulte, simply. "But, look here, what had you been saying
to Mrs. Vansuythen?"

Kurrell laughed. Mrs. Boulte had, with unbridled tongue, made havoc of his
plans; and he could at least retaliate by hurting the man in whose eyes he was
humiliated and shown dishonorable.

"Said to her? What does a man tell a lie like that for? I suppose I said
pretty much what you've said, unless I'm a good deal mistaken."

"I spoke the truth," said Boulte, again more to himself than Kurrell. "Emma
told me she hated me. She has no right in me."

"No! I suppose not. You're only her husband, y'know. And what did Mrs.
Vansuythen say after you had laid your disengaged heart at her feet?"

Kurrell felt almost virtuous as he put the question.

"I don't think that matters," Boulte replied; "and it doesn't concern you."

"But it does! I tell you it does" began Kurrell, shamelessly.

The sentence was cut by a roar of laughter from Boulte's lips. Kurrell was
silent for an instant, and then he, too, laughed--laughed long and loudly,
rocking in his saddle. It was an unpleasant sound--the mirthless mirth of
these men on the long, white line of the Narkarra Road.  There were no
strangers in Kashima, or they might have thought that captivity within the
Dosehri hills had driven half the European population mad. The laughter ended
abruptly, and Kurrell was the first to speak.

"Well, what are you going to do?"

Boulte looked up the road, and at the hills. "Nothing," said he, quietly;
"what's the use? It's too ghastly for anything. We must let the old life go
on. I can only call you a hound and a liar, and I can't go on calling you
names forever. Besides which, I don't feel that I'm much better. We can't get
out of this place. What is there to do?"

Kurrell looked round the rat-pit of Kashima and made no reply. The injured
husband took up the wondrous tale.

"Ride on, and speak to Emma if you want to. God knows I don't care what you
do."

He walked forward and left Kurrell gazing blankly after him. Kurrell did not
ride on either to see Mrs. Boulte or Mrs. Vansuythen. He sat in his saddle and
thought, while his pony grazed by the roadside.

The whir of approaching wheels roused him. Mrs. Vansuythen was driving home
Mrs. Boulte, white and wan, with a cut on her forehead.

"Stop, please," said Mrs. Boulte "I want to speak to Ted."

Mrs. Vansuythen obeyed, but as Mrs. Boulte leaned forward, putting her hand
upon the splash-board of the dog-cart, Kurrell spoke.

"I've seen your husband, Mrs. Boulte.

There was no necessity for any further explanation. The man's eyes were fixed,
not upon Mrs. Boulte, but her companion. Mrs. Boulte saw the look.

"Speak to him!" she pleaded, turning to the woman at her side. "Oh, speak to
him! Tell him what you told me just now. Tell him you hate him. Tell him you
hate him!"

She bent forward and wept bitterly, while the sais, impassive, went forward to
hold the horse. Mrs. Vansuythen turned scarlet and dropped the reins. She
wished to be no party to such unholy explanations.

"I've nothing to do with it," she began, coldly; but Mrs. Boulte's sobs
overcame her, and she addressed herself to the man. "I don't know what I am to
say, Captain Kurrell. I don't know what I can call you. I think you've--you've
behaved abominably, and she has cut her forehead terribly against the table."

"It doesn't hurt. It isn't anything," said Mrs. Boulte feebly. "That doesn't
matter. Tell him what you told me. Say you don't care for him. Oh, Ted, won't
you believe her?"

"Mrs. Boulte has made me understand that you were--that you were fond of her
once upon a time," went on Mrs. Vansuythen.

"Well!" said Kurrell brutally. "It seems to me that Mrs. Boulte had better be
fond of her own husband first."

"Stop!" said Mrs. Vansuythen. "Hear me first. I don't care--I don't want to
know anything about you and Mrs. Boulte; but I want you to know that I hate
you, that I think you are a cur, and that I'll never, never speak to you
again. Oh, I don't dare to say what I think of you, you--man!
_Sais,_gorah_ko_jane_do_."

"I want to speak to Ted," moaned Mrs. Boulte, but the dog-cart rattled on, and
Kurrell was left on the road, shamed, and boiling with wrath against Mrs.
Boulte.

He waited till Mrs. Vansuythen was driving back to her own house, and, she
being freed from the embarrassment of Mrs. Boulte's presence, learned for the
second time her opinion of himself and his actions.

In the evenings, it was the wont of all Kashima to meet at the platform on the
Narkarra Road, to drink tea, and discuss the trivialities of the day. Major
Vansuythen and his wife found themselves alone at the gathering-place for
almost the first time in their remembrance; and the cheery Major, in the teeth
of his wife's remarkably reasonable suggestion that the rest of the Station
might be sick, insisted upon driving round to the two bungalows and unearthing
the population.

"Sitting in the twilight!" said he, with great indignation to the Boultes.
That'll never do! Hang it all, we're one family here! You must come out, and
so must Kurrell.  I'll make him bring his banjo." So great is the power of
honest simplicity and a good digestion over guilty consciences that all
Kashima did turn out, even down to the banjo; and the Major embraced the
company in one expansive grin. As he grinned, Mrs. Vansuythen raised her eyes
for an instant and looked at all Kashima. Her meaning was clear. Major
Vansuythen would never know anything. He was to be the outsider in that happy
family whose cage was the Dosehri hills.

"You're singing villainously out of tune, Kurrell," said the Major,
truthfully. "Pass me that banjo."

And he sang in excruciating-wise till the stars came out and all Kashima went
to dinner.
* * * * *

 That was the beginning of the New Life of Kashima--the life that Mrs. Boulte
made when her tongue was loosened in the twilight.

Mrs. Vansuythen has never told the Major; and since be insists upon keeping up
a burdensome geniality, she has been compelled to break her vow of not
speaking to Kurrell.  This speech, which must of necessity preserve the
semblance of politeness and interest, serves admirably to keep alive the flame
of jealousy and dull hatred in Boulte's bosom, as it awakens the same passions
in his wife's heart. Mrs. Boulte hates Mrs. Vansuythen because she has taken
Ted from her, and, in some curious fashion, hates her because Mrs. Vansuythen-
-and here the wife's eyes see far more clearly than the husband's--detests
Ted. And Ted--that gallant captain and honorable man--knows now that it is
possible to hate a woman once loved, to the verge of wishing to silence her
forever with blows. Above all, is he shocked that Mrs. Boulte cannot see the
error of her ways.

Boulte and he go out tiger-shooting together in all friendship. Boulte has put
their relationship on a most satisfactory footing.

"You're a blackguard," he says to Kurrell, "and I've lost any self-respect I
may ever have had; but when you're with me, I can feel certain that you are
not with Mrs. Vansuythen, or making Emma miserable."

Kurrell endures anything that Boulte may say to him. Sometimes they are away
for three days together, and then the Major insists upon his wife going over
to sit with Mrs, Boulte; although Mrs. Vansuythen has repeatedly de. dared
that she prefers her husband's company to any in the world. From the way in
which she clings to him, she would certainly seem to be speaking the truth.

But of course, as the Major says, "in a little Station we must all be
friendly."



THE HILL OF ILLUSION

What rendered vain their deep desire?
A God, a God their severance ruled,
And bade between their shores to be
The unplumbed, salt, estranging sea.
            --Matthew Arnold.

HE. Tell your jhampanis not to hurry so, dear. They forget I'm fresh from the
Plains.

SHE. Sure proof that I have not been going out with any one. Yes, they are an
untrained crew. Where do we go?

HE. As usual--to the world's end. No, Jakko.

SHE. Have your pony led after you, then. It's a long round.

HE. And for the last time, thank Heaven!

SHE. Do you mean that still? I didn't dare to write to you about it...all
these months.

HE. Mean it! I've been shaping my affairs to that end since Autumn. What makes
you speak as though it had occurred to you for the first time?

SHE. I! Oh! I don't know. I've had long enough to think, too.

HE. And you've changed your mind?

SHE. No. You ought to know that I am a miracle of constancy. What are your--
arrangements?

HE. Ours, Sweetheart, please.

SHE. Ours, be it then. My poor boy, how the prickly heat has marked your
forehead! Have you ever tried sulphate of copper in water?

HE. It'll go away in a day or two up here. The arrangements are simple enough.
Tonga in the early morning--reach Kalka at twelve--Umballa at seven--down,
straight by night train, to Bombay, and then the steamer of the 21st for Rome.
That's my idea. The Continent and Sweden--a ten-week honeymoon.

SHE. Ssh! Don't talk of it in that way. It makes me afraid. Guy, how long have
we two been insane?

HE. Seven months and fourteen days; I forget the odd hours exactly, but I'll
think.

SHE. I only wanted to see if you remembered. Who are those two on the
Blessington Road?

HE. Eabrey and the Penner woman. What do they matter to us? Tell me everything
that you've been doing and saying and thinking.

SHE. Doing little, saying less, and thinking a great deal. I've hardly been
out at all.

Ha. That was wrong of you. You haven't been moping?

SHE. Not very much. Can you wonder that I'm disinclined for amusement?

HE. Frankly, I do. Where was the difficulty?

SHE. In this only. The more people I know and the more I'm known here, the
wider spread will be the news of the crash when it comes. I don't like that.

HE. Nonsense. We shall be out of it.

SHE. You think so?

HE. I'm sure of it, if there is any power in steam or horse-flesh to carry us
away. Ha! ha!

SHE. And the fun of the situation comes in--where, my Lancelot?

HE. Nowhere, Guinevere. I was only thinking of something.

SHE. They say men have a keener sense of humor than women. Now _I_ was
thinking of the scandal.

HE.  Don't think of anything so ugly. We shall be beyond it.

SHE. It will be there all the same in the mouths of Simla--telegraphed over
India, and talked of at the dinners--and when He goes out they will stare at
Him to see how He takes it. And we shall be dead, Guy dear--dead and cast into
the outer darkness where there is--

HE. Love at least. Isn't that enough?

SHE. I have said so.

HE. And you think so still?

SHE. What do you think?

Ha. What have I _done_? It means equal ruin to me, as the world reckons it--
outcasting, the loss of my appointment, the breaking of my life's work. I pay
my price.

SHE. And are you so much above the world that you can afford to pay it? Am I?

Ha. My Divinity--what else?

SHE. A very ordinary woman I'm afraid, but, so far, respectable. How'd you do,
Mrs. Middleditch? Your husband? I think he's riding down to Annandale with
Colonel Statters. Yes, isn't it divine after the rain?--Guy, how long am I to
be allowed to bow to Mrs. Middleditch? Till the 17th?

HE. Frowsy Scotchwoman? What is the use of bringing her into the discussion?
You were saying?

SHE. Nothing. Have you ever seen a man hanged?

HE. Yes. Once.

SHE. What was it for?

HE. Murder, of course.

SHE. Murder. Is that so great a sin after all? I wonder how he felt before the
drop fell.

HE. I don't think he felt much. What a gruesome little woman it is this
evening! You're shivering. Put on your cape, dear.

SHE. I think I will. Oh! Look at the mist coming over Sanjaoli; and I thought
we should have sunshine on the Ladies' Mile! Let's turn back.

HE. What's the good? There's a cloud on Elysium Hill, and that means it's
foggy all down the Mall. We'll go on. It'll blow away before we get to the
Convent, perhaps. 'Jove! It is chilly.

SHE. You feel it, fresh from below. Put on your ulster. What do you think of
my cape?

HE. Never ask a man his opinion of a woman's dress when he is desperately and
abjectly in love with the wearer. Let me look. Like everything else of yours
it's perfect. Where did you get it from?

SHE. He gave it me, on Wednesday...our wedding-day, you know.

HE. The deuce He did! He's growing generous in his old age. D'you like all
that frilly, bunchy stuff at the throat? I don't.

SHE. Don't you?

 "Kind Sir, 0' your courtesy,
 As you go by the town, Sir,
 Pray you 0' your love for me,
 Buy me a russet gown, Sir."

 HE. I won't say: "Keek into the draw-well, Janet, Janet." Only wait a little,
darling, and you shall be stocked with russet gowns and everything else.

SHE. And when the frocks wear out, you'll get me new ones--and everything
else?

HE. Assuredly.

SHE. I wonder!

HE. Look here, Sweetheart, I didn't spend two days and two nights in the train
to hear you wonder. I thought we'd settled all that at Shaifazehat.

SHE (dreamily). At Shaifazehat? Does the Station go on still? That was ages
and ages ago. It must be crumbling to pieces. All except the Amirtollah kutcha
road. I don't believe that could crumble till the Day of Judgment.

Ha. You think so? What is the mood now?

SHE. I can't tell. How cold it is! Let us get on quickly.

Ha. Better walk a little. Stop your jhampanis and get out. What's the matter
with you this evening, dear?

SHE. Nothing. You must grow accustomed to my ways. If I'm boring you I can go
home. Here's Captain Congleton coming; I dare say he'll be willing to escort
me.

Ha. Goose! Between us, too! Damn Captain Congleton. There!

SHE. Chivalrous Knight! Is it your habit to swear much in talking? It jars a
little, and you might swear at me.

HE. My angel! I didn't know what I was saying; and you changed so quickly that
I couldn't follow. I'll apologize in dust and ashes.

SHE. There'll be enough of those later on. Good night, Captain Congleton.
Going to the singing-quadrilles already? What dances am I giving you next
week? No! You must have written them down wrong. Five and Seven, I said. If
you've made a mistake, I certainly don't intend to suffer for it. You must
alter your programme.

HE. I thought you told me that you bad not been going out much this season?

SHE. Quite true, but when I do I dance with Captain Congleton. He dances very
nicely.

HE. And sit out with him, I suppose?

SHE. Yes. Have you any objection? Shall I stand under the chandelier in
future?

HE. What does he talk to you about?

SHE. What do men talk about when they sit out?

Ha. Ugh! Don't! Well now I'm up, you must dispense with the fascinating
Congleton for a while. I don't like him.

 SHE. (after a pause). Do you know what you have said?

HE. 'Can't say that I do exactly. I'm not in the best of tempers.

SHE. So I see...and feel. My true and faithful lover, where is your "eternal
constancy," "unalterable trust," and "reverent devotion"? I remember those
phrases; you seem to have forgotten them. I mention a man's name--

HE. A good deal more than that.

SHE. Well, speak to him about a dance--perhaps the last dance that I shall
ever dance in my life before I...before I go away; and you at once distrust
and insult me.

HE. I never said a word.

SHE. How much did you imply? Guy, is this amount of confidence to be our stock
to start the new life on?

HE. No, of course not. I didn't mean that. On my word of honor, I didn't. Let
it pass, dear. Please let it pass.

SHE. This once--yes--and a second time, and again and again, all through the
years when I shall be unable to resent it. You want too much, my Lancelot,
and...you know too much.

Hp. How do you mean?

SHE. That is a part of the punishment. There cannot be perfect trust between
us.

HE. In Heaven's name, why not?

SHE. Hush! The Other Place is quite enough. Ask yourself.

HE. I don't follow.

SHE. You trust me so implicitly that when I look at another man--Never mind,
Guy. Have you ever made love to a girl--a good girl?

HE. Something of the sort. Centuries ago--in the Dark Ages, before I ever met
you, dear.

SHE. Tell me what you said to her.

HE. What does a man say to a girl? I've forgotten.

SHE. I remember. He tells her that he trusts her and worships the ground she
walks on, and that he'll love and honor and protect her till her dying day;
and so she marries in that belief. At least, I speak of one girl who was not
protected.

HE. Well, and then?

SHE. And then, Guy, and then, that girl needs ten times the love and trust and
honor--yes, honor--that was enough when she was only a mere wife if--if--the
other life she chooses to lead is to be made even bearable. Do you understand?

HE. Even bearable! It'll he Paradise.

SHE. Ah! Can you give me all I've asked for--not now, nor a few months later,
but when you begin to think of what you might have done if you had kept your
own appointment and your caste here--when you begin to look upon me as a drag
and a burden? I shall want it most, then, Guy, for there will be no one in the
wide world but you.

HE. You're a little over-tired tonight, Sweetheart, and you're taking a stage
view of the situation. After the necessary business in the Courts, the road is
clear to--

SHE. "The holy state of matrimony!" Ha! ha! ha!

HE. Ssh! Don't laugh in that horrible way!

SHE. I-I c-c-c-can't help it! Isn't it too absurd! Ah! Ha! ha! ha! Guy, stop
me quick or I shall--l-l-laugh till we get to the Church.

HE. For goodness' sake, stop! Don't make an exhibition of yourself. What is
the matter with you?

SHE. N-nothing. I'm better now.

HE. That's all right. One moment, dear. There's a little wisp of hair got
loose from behind your right ear and it's straggling over your cheek. So!

SHE. Thank'oo. I'm 'fraid my hat's on one side, too.

HE. What do you wear these huge dagger bonnet-skewers for? They're big enough
to kill a man with.

SHE. Oh! Don't kill me, though. You're sticking it into my head! Let me do it.
You men are so clumsy.

HE. Have you had many opportunities of comparing us--in this sort of work?

SHE. Guy, what is my name?

HE. Eh! I don't follow.

SHE. Here's my cardcase. Can you read?

HE. Yes. Well?

SHE. Well, that answers your question. You know the other man's name. Am I
sufficiently humbled, or would you like to ask me if there is any one else?

HE. I see now. My darling, I never meant that for an instant. I was only
joking. There! Lucky there's no one on the road. They'd be scandalized.

SHE. They'll be more scandalized before the end.

HE. Do-on't! I don't like you to talk in that way.

SHE. Unreasonable man! Who asked me to face the situation and accept it? Tell
me, do I look like Mrs. Penner? Do I look like a naughty woman? Swear I don't!
Give me your word of honor, my honorable friend, that I'm not like Mrs.
Buzgago. That's the way she stands, with her hands clasped at the back of her
head. D'you like that?

HE. Don't be affected.

SHE. I'm not. I'm Mrs. Buzgago. Listen!

 Pendant une anne' toute entiere
 Le regiment n'a pas r'paru.
 Au Ministere de la Guerre
 On le r'porta comme perdu.

 On se r'noncait a r'trouver sa trace,
 Quand un matin subitement,
 On le vit r'paraitre sur la place
 L'Colonel toujours en avant.

That's the way she rolls her r's. Am I like her?

HE. No, but I object when you go on like an actress and sing stuff of that
kind. Where in the world did you pick up the Chanson du Colonel? It isn't a
drawing-room song. It isn't proper.

SHE. Mrs. Buzgago taught it me. She is both drawing-room and proper, and in
another month she'll shut her drawing-room to me, and thank God she isn't as
improper as I am. Oh, Guy, Guy! I wish I was like some women and had no
scruples about--what is it Keene says?--"Wearing a corpse's hair and being
false to the bread they eat."

HE. I am only a man of limited intelligence, and just now, very bewildered.
When you have quite finished flashing through all your moods tell me, and I'll
try to understand the last one.

SHE. Moods, Guy! I haven't any. I'm sixteen years old and you're just twenty,
and you've been waiting for two hours outside the school in the cold. And now
I've met you, and now we're walking home together. Does that suit you, My
Imperial Majesty?

HE. No. We aren't children. Why can't you be rational?

SHE. He asks me that when I'm going to commit suicide for his sake, and, and--
I don't want to be French and rave about my mother, but have I ever told you
that I have a mother, and a brother who was my pet before I married? He's
married now. Can't you imagine the pleasure that the news of the elopement
will give him? Have you any people at Home, Guy, to be pleased with your
performances?

HE. One or two. One can't make omelets without breaking eggs.

SHE (slowly). I don't see the necessity--

HE. Hah! What do you mean?

SHE. Shall I speak the truth?

HE. Under the circumstances, perhaps it would be as well.

SHE. Guy, I'm afraid.

HE. I thought we'd settled all that. What of?

SHE. Of you.

HE. Oh, damn it all! The old business! This is too had!

SHE. Of you.

HE. And what now?

SHE. What do you think of me?

HE. Beside the question altogether. What do you intend to do?

SHE. I daren't risk it. I'm afraid. If I could only cheat--

HE. A la Buzgago? No, thanks. That's the one point on which I have any notion
of Honor. I won't eat his salt and steal too. I'll loot openly or not at all.

SHE. I never meant anything else.

HE. Then, why in the world do you pretend not to be willing to come?

SHE. It's not pretence, Guy. I am afraid.

HE. Please explain.

SHE. It can't last, Guy. It can't last. You'll get angry, and then you'll
swear, and then you'll get jealous, and then you'll mistrust me--you do now--
and you yourself will be the best reason for doubting. And I--what shall I do?
I shall be no better than Mrs. Buzgago found out--no better than any one. And
you'll know that. Oh, Guy, can't you see?

HE. I see that you are desperately unreasonable, little woman.

SHE. There! The moment I begin to object, you get angry. What will you do when
I am only your property--stolen property? It can't be, Guy. It can't be! I
thought it could, but it can't. You'll get tired of me.

HE. I tell you I shall not. Won't anything make you understand that?

SHE. There, can't you see? If you speak to me like that now, you'll call me
horrible names later, if I don't do everything as you like. And if you were
cruel to me, Guy, where should I go--where should I go? I can't trust you. Oh!
I can't trust you!

HE. I suppose I ought to say that I can trust you. I've ample reason.

SHE. Please don't, dear. It hurts as much as if you hit me.

HE. It isn't exactly pleasant for me.

SHE. I can't help it. I wish I were dead! I can't trust you, and I don't trust
myself. Oh, Guy, let it die away and be forgotten!

HE. Too late now. I don't understand you--I won't--and I can't trust myself to
talk this evening. May I call tomorrow?

SHE. Yes. No! Oh, give me time! The day after. I get into my 'rickshaw here
and meet Him at Peliti's. You ride.

HE. I'll go on to Peliti's too. I think I want a drink. My world's knocked
about my ears and the stars are falling. Who are those brutes howling in the
Old Library?

SHE. They're rehearsing the singing-quadrilles for the Fancy Ball. Can't you
hear Mrs. Buzgago's voice? She has a solo. It's quite a new idea. Listen.

MRS. BUZGAGO (in the Old Library, con. molt. exp.).

See-saw! Margery Daw!
 Sold her bed to lie upon straw.
Wasn't she a silly slut
 To sell her bed and lie upon dirt?

 Captain Congleton, I'm going to alter that to "flirt." It sound better.

HE. No, I've changed my mind about the drink. Good night, little lady. I shall
see you tomorrow?

SHE. Y~es. Good night, Guy. Don't be angry with me.

HE. Angry! You know I trust you absolutely. Good night and-God bless you!

(Three seconds later. Alone.) Hmm! I'd give something to discover whether
there's another man at the back of all this.



A SECOND-RATE WOMAN

Est fuga, volvitur rota,
 On we drift; where looms the dim port?
One Two Three Four Five contribute their quota:
 Something is gained if one caught but the import,
Show it us, Hugues of Saxe-Gotha.

--Master Hugues of Saxe-Gotha.

 "DRESSED! Don't tell me that woman ever dressed in her life. She stood in the
middle of her room while her ayah--no, her husband--it must have been a man--
threw her clothes at her. She then did her hair with her fingers, and rubbed
her bonnet in the flue under the bed. I know she did, as well as if I had
assisted at the orgy. Who is she?" said Mrs. Hauksbee.

"Don't!" said Mrs. Mallowe, feebly. "You make my head ache. I'm miserable
today. Stay me with fondants, comfort me with chocolates, for I am--Did you
bring anything from Peliti's?"

"Questions to begin with. You shall have the sweets when you have answered
them. Who and what is the creature? There were at least half a dozen men round
her, and she appeared to be going to sleep in their midst."

"Delville," said Mrs. Mallowe, "'Shady' Delville, to distinguish her from Mrs.
Jim of that ilk. She dances as untidily as she dresses, I believe, and her
husband is somewhere in Madras. Go and call, if you are so interested."

"What have I to do with Shigramitish women? She merely caught my attention for
a minute, and I wondered at the attraction that a dowd has for a certain type
of man. I expected to see her walk out of her clothes--until I looked at her
eyes."

"Hooks and eyes, surely," drawled Mrs. Mallowe.

"Don't be clever, Polly. You make my head ache. And round this hayrick stood a
crowd of men--a positive crowd!"

"Perhaps they also expected"--

"Polly, don't be Rabelaisian!"

Mrs. Mallowe curled herself up comfortably on the sofa, and turned her
attention to the sweets. She and Mrs. Hauksbee shared the same house at Simla;
and these things befell two seasons after the matter of Otis Yeere, which has
been already recorded.

Mrs. Hauksbee stepped into the veranda and looked down upon the Mall, her
forehead puckered with thought.

"Hah!" said Mrs. Hauksbee, shortly. "Indeed!"

"What is it?" said Mrs. Mallowe, sleepily.

"That dowd and The Dancing Master--to whom I object."

"Why to The Dancing Master? He is a middle-aged gentleman, of reprobate and
romantic tendencies, and tries to be a friend of mine."

"Then make up your mind to lose him. Dowds cling by nature, and I should
imagine that this animal--how terrible her bonnet looks from above!--is
specially clingsome."

"She is welcome to The Dancing Master so far as I am concerned. I never could
take an interest in a monotonous liar. The frustrated aim of his life is to
persuade people that he is a bachelor."

"0--oh! I think I've met that sort of man before. And isn't he?"

"No. He confided that to me a few days ago. Ugh! Some men ought to he killed."

"What happened then?"

"He posed as the horror of horrors--a misunderstood man. Heaven knows the
femme incomprise is sad enough and had enough--but the other thing!"

"And so fat too! I should have laughed in his face. Men seldom confide in me.
How is it they come to you?"

"For the sake of impressing me with their careers in the past. Protect me from
men with confidences!"

"And yet you encourage them?"

"What can I do? They talk. I listen, and they vow that I am sympathetic. I
know I always profess astonishment even when the plot is--of the most old
possible."

"Yes. Men are so unblushingly explicit if they are once allowed to talk,
whereas women's confidences are full of reservations and fibs, except"--

"When they go mad and babble of the Unutterabilities after a week's
acquaintance. Really, if you come to consider, we know a great deal more of
men than of our own sex."

"And the extraordinary thing is that men will never believe it. They say we
are trying to hide something."

"They are generally doing that on their own account. Alas! These chocolates
pall upon me, and I haven't eaten more than a dozen. I think I shall go to
sleep."
                                        
"Then you'll get fat. dear. If you took more exercise and a more intelligent
interest in your neighbors you would--"

"Be as much loved as Mrs. Hauksbee. You're a darling in many ways and I like
you--you are not a woman's woman--but why do you trouble yourself about mere
human beings?"

"Because in the absence of angels, who I am sure would be horribly dull, men
and women are the most fascinating things in the whole wide world, lazy one. I
am interested in The Dowd--I am interested in The Dancing Master--I am
interested in the Hawley Boy--and I am interested in you."

"Why couple me with the Hawley Boy? He is your property."

"Yes, and in his own guileless speech, I'm making a good thing out of him.
When he is slightly more reformed, and has passed his Higher Standard, or
whatever the authorities think fit to exact from him, I shall select a pretty
little girl, the Holt girl, I think, and"--here she waved her hands airily--"
'whom Mrs. Hauksbee bath joined together let no man put asunder.' That's all."

"And when you have yoked May Holt with the most notorious detrimental in
Simla, and earned the undying hatred of Mamma Holt, what will you do with me,
Dispenser of the Destinies of the Universe?"

Mrs. Hauksbee dropped into a low chair in front of the fire, and, chin in
band, gazed long and steadfastly at Mrs. Mallowe.

"I do not know," she said, shaking her head, "what I shall do with you, dear.
It's obviously impossible to marry you to some one else--your husband would
object and the experiment might not be successful after all. I think I shall
begin by preventing you from--what is it?--'sleeping on ale-house benches and
snoring in the sun.'"

"Don't! I don't like your quotations. They are so rude. Go to the Library and
bring me new books."

"While you sleep? No! If you don't come with me, I shall spread your newest
frock on my 'rickshaw-bow, and when any one asks me what I am doing, I shall
say that I am going to Phelps's to get it let out. I shall take care that Mrs.
MacNamara sees me. Put your things on, there's a good girl."

Mrs. Mallowe groaned and obeyed, and the two went off to the Library, where
they found Mrs. Delville and the man who went by the nickname of The Dancing
Master. By that time Mrs Mallowe was awake and eloquent.

"That is the Creature!" said Mrs Hauksbee, with the air of one pointing out a
slug in the road.

"No," said Mrs. Mallowe. "The man is the Creature. Ugh! Good-evening, Mr.
Bent. I thought you were coming to tea this evening."

"Surely it was for tomorrow, was it not?" answered The Dancing Master. "I
understood...I fancied...I'm so sorry...How very unfortunate!..."

But Mrs. Mallowe had passed on.

"For the practiced equivocator you said he was," murmured Mrs. Hauksbee, "he
strikes me as a failure. Now wherefore should he have preferred a walk with
The Dowd to tea with us? Elective affinities, I suppose--both grubby. Polly,
I'd never forgive that woman as long as the world rolls."

"I forgive every woman everything," said Mrs. Mallowe. "He will be a
sufficient punishment for her. What a common voice she has!"

Mrs. Delville's voice was not pretty, her carriage was even less lovely, and
her raiment was strikingly neglected. All these things Mrs. Mallowe noticed
over the top of a magazine.

"Now what is there in her?" said Mrs. Hauksbee. "Do you see what I meant about
the clothes falling off? If I were a man I would perish sooner than be seen
with that rag-bag. And yet, she has good eyes, but--oh!"

"What is it?"

"She doesn't know how to use them! On my Honor, she does not. Look! Oh look!
Untidiness I can endure, but ignorance never! The woman's a fool."

"H'sh! She'll hear you."

"All the women in Simla are fools. She'll think I mean some one else. Now
she's going out. What a thoroughly objectionable couple she and The Dancing
Master make! Which reminds me. Do you suppose they'll ever dance together?"

"Wait and see. I don't envy her the conversation of The Dancing Master--
loathly man. His wife ought to be up here before long."

"Do you know anything about him?"

"Only what he told me. It may be a11 a fiction. He married a girl bred in the
country, I think, and, being an honorable, chivalrous soul, told me that he
repented his bargain and sent her to her mother as often as possible--a person
who has lived in the Doon since the memory of man and goes to Mussoorie when
other people go Home. The wife is with her at present. So he says."

'Babies?'

"One only, but he talks of his wife in a revolting way. I hated him for it. He
thought he was being epigrammatic and brilliant."

"That is a vice peculiar to men. I dislike him because he is generally in the
wake of some girl, disappointing the Eligibles. He will persecute May Holt no
more, unless I am much mistaken."

"No. I think Mrs. Delville may occupy his attention for a while."

"Do you suppose she knows that he is the head of a family?"

"Not from his lips. He swore me to eternal secrecy. Wherefore I tell you.
Don't you know that type of man?"

"Not intimately, thank goodness! As a general rule, when a man begins to abuse
his wife to me, I find that the Lord gives me wherewith to answer him
according to his folly; and we part with a coolness between us. I laugh."

"I'm different. I've no sense of humor."

"Cultivate it, then. It has been my mainstay for more years than I care to
think about. A well-educated sense of Humor will save a woman when Religion,
Training, and Home influences fail; and we may all need salvation sometimes."

"Do you suppose that the Delville woman has humor?"

"Her dress betrays her. How can a Thing who wears her supple'ment under her
left arm have any notion of the fitness of things--much less their folly? If
she discards The Dancing Master after having once seen him dance, I may
respect her, Otherwise--

"But are we not both assuming a great deal too much, dear? You saw the woman
at Peliti's--half an hour later you saw her walking with The Dancing Master--
an hour later you met her here at the Library."

"Still with The Dancing Master, remember."

"Still with The Dancing Master, I admit, but why on the strength of that
should you imagine"--

"I imagine nothing. I have no imagination. I am only convinced that The
Dancing Master is attracted to The Dowd because he is objectionable in every
way and she in every other. If I know the man as you have described him, he
holds his wife in slavery at present."

"She is twenty years younger than he."

"Poor wretch! And, in the end, after he has posed and swaggered and lied--he
has a mouth under that ragged moustache simply made for lies--he will be
rewarded according to his merits."

"I wonder what those really are," said Mrs. Mallowe.

But Mrs. Hauksbee, her face close to the shelf of the new books, was humming
softly: "What shall he have who killed the Deer!" She was a lady of unfettered
speech.

One month later, she announced her intention of calling upon Mrs. Delville.
Both Mrs. Hauksbee and Mrs. Mallowe were in morning wrappers, and there was a
great peace in the land.

"I should go as I was," said Mrs. Mallowe. "It would be a delicate compliment
to her style."

Mrs. Hauksbee studied herself in the glass.

"Assuming for a moment that she ever darkened these doors, I should put on
this robe, after all the others, to show her what a morning wrapper ought to
be. It might enliven her. As it is, I shall go in the dove-colored--sweet
emblem of youth and innocence--and shall put on my new gloves."

"If you really are going, dirty tan would be too good; and you know that dove-
-color spots with the rain."

"I care not. I may make her envious. At least I shall try, though one cannot
expect very much from a woman who puts a lace tucker into her habit."

"Just Heavens! When did she do that?"

"Yesterday--riding with The Dancing Master. I met them at the back of Jakko,
and the rain had made the lace lie down. To complete the effect, she was
wearing an unclean terai with the elastic under her chin. I felt almost too
well content to take the trouble to despise her."

"The Hawley Boy was riding with you. What did he think?"

"Does a boy ever notice these things? Should I like him if he did? He stared
in the rudest way, and just when I thought he had seen the elastic, he said,
'There's something very taking about that face.' I rebuked him on the spot. I
don't approve of boys being taken by faces."

"Other than your own. I shouldn't be in the least surprised if the Hawley Boy
immediately went to call."

"I forbade him. Let her be satisfied with The Dancing Master, and his wife
when she comes up. I'm rather curious to see Mrs. Bent and the Delville woman
together."

Mrs. Hauksbee departed and, at the end of an hour, returned slightly flushed.

"There is no limit to the treachery of youth! I ordered the Hawley Boy, as he
valued my patronage, not to call. The first person I stumble over--literally
stumble over--in her poky, dark, little drawing-room is, of course, the Hawley
Boy. She kept us waiting ten minutes, and then emerged as though he had been
tipped out of the dirty-clothes basket. You know my way, dear, when I am all
put out. I was Superior, crrrushingly Superior! 'Lifted my eyes to Heaven, and
had heard of nothing--'dropped my eyes on the carpet and 'really didn't know'-
-'played with my cardcase and 'supposed so.' The Hawley Boy giggled like a
girl, and I had to freeze him with scowls between the sentences."

"And she?"

"She sat in a heap on the edge of a couch, and managed to convey the
impression that she was suffering from stomach-ache, at the very least. It was
all I could do not to ask after her symptoms. When I rose she grunted just
like a buffalo in the water--too lazy to move."
                                   
"Are you certain?"--

"Am I blind, Polly? Laziness, sheer laziness, nothing else--or her garments
were only constructed for sitting down in. I stayed for a quarter of an hour
trying to penetrate the gloom, to guess what her surroundings were like, while
she stuck out her tongue."

"Lu--cy!"

"Well--I'll withdraw the tongue, though I'm sure if she didn't do it when I
was in the room, she did the minute I was outside. At any rate, she lay in a
lump and grunted. Ask the Hawley Boy, dear. I believe the grunts were meant
for sentences. but she spoke so indistinctly that I can't swear to it."

"You are incorrigible, simply."

"I am not! Treat me civilly, give me peace with honor, don't put the only
available seat facing the window, and a child may eat jam in my lap before
Church. But I resent being grunted at. Wouldn't you? Do you suppose that she
communicates her views on life and love to The Dancing Master in a set of
modulated 'Grmphs'?"

"You attach too much importance to The Dancing Master."

"He came as we went, and The Dowd grew almost cordial at the sight of him. He
smiled greasily, and moved about that darkened dog-kennel in a suspiciously
familiar way."

"Don't be uncharitable. Any sin but that I'll forgive."

"Listen to the voice of History. I am only describing what I saw. He entered,
the heap on the sofa revived slightly, and the Hawley Boy and I came away
together. He is disillusioned, hut I felt it my duty to lecture him severely
for going there. And that's all."

"Now for Pity's sake leave the wretched creature and The Dancing Master alone.
They never did you any harm."

"No harm? To dress as an example and a stumbling-block for half Simla, and
then to find this Person who is dressed by the hand of God--not that I wish to
disparage Him for a moment, but you know the tikka-dhurzie way He attires
those lilies of the field--this Person draws the eyes of men--and some of them
nice men? It's almost enough to make one discard clothing. I told the Hawley
Boy so."

"And what did that sweet youth do?"

"Turned shell-pink and looked across the far blue hills like a distressed
cherub. Am I talking wildly, Polly? Let me say my say, and I shall be calm.
Otherwise I may go abroad and disturb Simla with a few original reflections.
Excepting always your own sweet self, there isn't a single woman in the land
who understands me when I am--what's the word?"

"Tete-Fele'e," suggested Mrs. Mallowe.

"Exactly! And now let us have tiffin. The demands of Society are exhausting,
and as Mrs. Delville says"--Here Mrs. Hauksbee, to the horror of the
khitmatgars, lapsed into a series of grunts, while Mrs. Mallowe stared in lazy
surprise.

"'God gie us a gude conceit of oorselves,'" said Mrs. Hauksbee, piously,
returning to her natural speech. "Now, in any other woman that would have been
vulgar. I am consumed with curiosity to see Mrs. Bent. I expect
complications."

"Woman of one idea," said Mrs. Mallowe, shortly; "all complications are as old
as the hills! I have lived through or near all--all--ALL!"

"And yet do not understand that men and women never behave twice alike. I am
old who was young--if ever I put my head in your lap, you dear, big sceptic,
you will learn that my parting is gauze--but never, no never have I lost my
interest in men and women. Polly, I shall see this business Out to the bitter
end."

"I am going to sleep," said Mrs. Mallowe, calmly. "I never interfere with men
or women unless I am compelled," and she retired with dignity to her own room.

Mrs. Hauksbee's curiosity was not long left ungratified, for Mrs. Bent came up
to Simla a few days after the conversation faithfully reported above, and
pervaded the Mall by her husband's side.

"Behold!" said Mrs. Hauksbee, thoughtfully rubbing her nose. "That is the last
link of the chain, if we omit the husband of the Delville, whoever he may be.
Let me consider. The Bents and the Delvilles inhabit the same hotel; and the
Delville is detested by the Waddy--do you know the Waddy?--who is almost as
big a dowd. The Waddy also abominates the male Bent, for which, if her other
sins do not weigh too heavily, she will eventually be caught up to Heaven."

"Don't be irreverent," said Mrs. Mallowe. "I like Mrs. Bent's face."

"I am discussing the Waddy," returned Mrs. Hauksbee, loftily. "The Waddy will
take the female Bent apart, after having borrowed--yes!--everything that she
can, from hairpins to babies' bottles. Such, my dear, is life in a hotel. The
Waddy will tell the female Bent facts and fictions about The Dancing Master
and The Dowd."

"Lucy, I should like you better if you were not always looking into people's
back bedrooms."

"Anybody can look into their front drawing-rooms; and remember whatever I do,
and whatever I look, I never talk--as the Waddy will. Let us hope that The
Dancing Master's greasy smile and manner of the pedagogue will soften the
heart of that cow, his wife. If mouths speak truth, I should think that little
Mrs. Bent could get very angry on occasion.

"But what reason has she for being angry?"

"What reason! The Dancing Master in himself is a reason. How does it go? 'If
in his life some trivial errors fall, Look in his face and you'll believe them
all.' I am prepared to credit any evil of The Dancing Master, because I hate
him so. And The Dowd is so disgustingly badly dressed"--

"That she, too, is capable of every iniquity? I always prefer to believe the
best of everybody. It saves so much trouble."

"Very good. I prefer to believe the worst. It saves useless expenditure of
sympathy. And you may be quite certain that the Waddy believes with me."

Mrs. Mallowe sighed and made no answer.

The conversation was holden after dinner while Mrs. Hauksbee was dressing for
a dance.

"I am too tired to go," pleaded Mrs. Mallowe, and Mrs. Hauksbee left her in
peace till two in the morning, when she was aware of emphatic knocking at her
door.

"Don't be very angry, dear," said Mrs. Hauksbee. "My idiot of an ayah has gone
home, and, as I hope to sleep tonight, there isn't a soul in the place to
unlace me."

"Oh, this is too bad!" said Mrs. Mallowe sulkily.

"'Can't help it. I'm a lone, lorn grass-widow, dear, but I will not sleep in
my stays. And such news, too! Oh, do unlace me, there's a darling! The Dowd--
The Dancing Master--I and the Hawley Boy--You know the North veranda?"

"How can I do anything if you spin round like this?" protested Mrs. Mallowe,
fumbling with the knot of the laces.

"Oh, I forget. I must tell my tale without the aid of your eyes. Do you know
you've lovely eyes, dear? Well to begin with, I took the Hawley Boy to a kala
juggah."

"Did he want much taking?"

"Lots! There was an arrangement of loose-boxes in kanats, and she was in the
next one talking to him."

"Which? How? Explain."

"You know what I mean--The Dowd and The Dancing Master. We could hear every
word and we listened shamelessly--'specially the Hawley Boy. Polly, I quite
love that woman!"

"This is interesting. There! Now turn round. What happened?"

"One moment. Ah-h! Blessed relief. I've been looking forward to taking them
off for the last half-hour--which is ominous at my time of life. But, as I was
saying, we listened and heard The Dowd drawl worse than ever. She drops her
final g's like a barmaid or a blue-blooded Aide-de-Camp. 'Look he-ere, you're
gettin' too fond 0' me,' she said, and The Dancing Master owned it was so in
language that nearly made me ill. The Dowd reflected for a while. Then we
heard her say, 'Look he-ere, Mister Bent, why are you such an awful liar?' I
nearly exploded while The Dancing Master denied the charge. It seems that he
never told her he was a married man."

"I said he wouldn't."

'~And she had taken this to heart, on personal grounds, I suppose. She drawled
along for five minutes, reproaching him with his perfidy and grew quite
motherly. 'Now you've got a nice little wife of your own--you have,' she said.
'She's ten times too good for a fat old man like you, and, look he-ere, you
never told me a word about her, and I've been thinkin' about it a good deal,
and I think you're a liar.' Wasn't that delicious? The Dancing Master
maundered and raved till the Hawley Boy suggested that he should burst in and
beat him. His voice runs up into an impassioned squeak when he is afraid. The
Dowd must be an extraordinary woman. She explained that had he been a bachelor
she might not have objected to his devotion; but since he was a married man
and the father of a very nice baby, she considered him a hypocrite, and this
she repeated twice. She wound up her drawl with: 'An I'm tellin' you this
because your wife is angry with me, an' I hate quarrellin' with any other
woman, an' I like your wife. You know how you have behaved for the last six
weeks. You shouldn't have done it, indeed you shouldn't. You're too old an'
fat.' Can't you imagine how The Dancing Master would wince at that! 'Now go
away,' she said. 'I don't want to tell you what I think of you, because I
think you are not nice. I'll stay he-ere till the next dance begins.' Did you
think that the creature had so much in her?"

"I never studied her as closely as you did. It sounds unnatural. What
happened?"

"The Dancing Master attempted blandishment, reproof, jocularity, and the style
of the Lord High Warden, and I had almost to pinch the Hawley Boy to make him
keep quiet. She grunted at the end of each sentence and, in the end he went
away swearing to himself, quite like a man in a novel. He looked more
objectionable than ever. I laughed. I love that woman--in spite of her
clothes. And now I'm going to bed. What do you think of it?"

"I sha'n't begin to think till the morning," said Mrs. Mallowe, yawning
"Perhaps she spoke the truth. They do fly into it by accident sometimes."

Mrs. Hauksbee's account of her eavesdropping was an ornate one but truthful in
the main. For reasons best known to herself, Mrs. "Shady" Delville had turned
upon Mr Bent and rent him limb from limb, casting him away limp and
disconcerted ere she withdrew the light of her eyes from him permanently.
Being a man of resource, and anything but pleased in that he had been called
both old and fat, he gave Mrs. Bent to understand that he had, during her
absence in the Doon, been the victim of unceasing persecution at the hands of
Mrs. Delville, and he told the tale so often and with such eloquence that he
ended in believing it, while his wife marvelled at the manners and customs of
"some women." When the situation showed signs of languishing, Mrs. Waddy was
always on hand to wake the smouldering fires of suspicion in Mrs. Bent's bosom
and to contribute generally to the peace and comfort of the hotel. Mr. Bent's
life was not a happy one, for if Mrs. Waddy's story were true, he was, argued
his wife, untrustworthy to the last degree. If his own statement was true, his
charms of manner and conversation were so great that he needed constant
surveillance. And he received it, till he repented genuinely of his marriage
and neglected his personal appearance. Mrs. Delville alone in the hotel was
unchanged. She removed her chair some six paces toward the head of the table,
and occasionally in the twilight ventured on timid overtures of friendship to
Mrs. Bent, which were repulsed.

"She does it for my sake," hinted the Virtuous Bent.

"A dangerous and designing woman," purred Mrs. Waddy.

Worst of all, every other hotel in Simla was full!
* * * * * *

"Polly, are you afraid of diphtheria?"

"Of nothing in the world except smallpox. Diphtheria kills, but it doesn't
disfigure. Why do you ask?"

"Because the Bent baby has got it, and the whole hotel is upside down in
consequence. The Waddy has 'set her five young on the rail' and fled. The
Dancing Master fears for his precious throat, and that miserable little woman,
his wife, has no notion of what ought to be done. She wanted to put it into a
mustard bath--for croup!"

"Where did you learn all this?"

"Just now, on the Mall. Dr. Howlen told me. The Manager of the hotel is
abusing the Bents, and the Bents are abusing the manager. They are a feckless
couple."

"Well. What's on your mind?"

"This; and I know it's a grave thing to ask. Would you seriously object to my
bringing the child over here, with its mother?"

"On the most strict understanding that we see nothing of The Dancing Master."

"He will be only too glad to stay away. Polly, you're an angel. The woman
really is at her wits' end."

"And you know nothing about her, careless, and would hold her up to public
scorn if it gave you a minute's amusement. Therefore you risk your life for
the sake of her brat. No, Loo, I'm not the angel. I shall keep to my rooms and
avoid her. But do as you please--only tell me why you do it."

Mrs. Hauksbee's eyes softened; she looked out of the window and back into Mrs.
Mallowe's face.

"I don't know," said Mrs. Hauksbee, simply.

"You dear!"

"Polly!--and for aught you knew you might have taken my fringe off. Never do
that again without warning. Now we'll get the rooms ready. I don't suppose I
shall be allowed to circulate in society for a month."

"And I also. Thank goodness I shall at last get all the sleep I want."

Much to Mrs. Bent's surprise she and the baby were brought over to the house
almost before she knew where she was. Bent was devoutly and undisguisedly
thankful, for he was afraid of the infection, and also hoped that a few weeks
in the hotel alone with Mrs. Delville might lead to explanations. Mrs. Bent
had thrown her jealousy to the winds in her fear for her child's life.

"We can give you good milk," said Mrs. Hauksbee to her, "and our house is much
nearer to the Doctor's than the hotel, and you won't feel as though you were
living in a hostile camp Where is the dear Mrs. Waddy? She seemed to be a
particular friend of yours."

"They've all left me," said Mrs. Bent, bitterly. "Mrs. Waddy went first. She
said I ought to be ashamed of myself for introducing diseases there, and I am
sure it wasn't my fault that little Dora"--

"How nice!" cooed Mrs. Hauksbee. "The Waddy is an infectious disease herself--
'more quickly caught than the plague and the taker runs presently mad.' I
lived next door to her at the Elysium, three years ago. Now see, you won't
give us the least trouble, and I've ornamented all the house with sheets
soaked in carbolic. It smells comforting, doesn't it? Remember I'm always in
call, and my ayah's at your service when yours goes to her meals and--and...
if you cry I'll never forgive you."

Dora Bent occupied her mother's unprofitable attention through the day and the
night. The Doctor called thrice in the twenty-four hours, and the house reeked
with the smell of the Condy's Fluid, chlorine-water, and carbolic acid washes.
Mrs. Mallowe kept to her own rooms--she considered that she had made
sufficient concessions in the cause of humanity--and Mrs. Hauksbee was more
esteemed by the Doctor as a help in the sick-room than the half-distraught
mother.

"I know nothing of illness," said Mrs. Hauksbee to the Doctor. "Only tell me
what to do, and I'll do it."

"Keep that crazy woman from kissing the child, and let her have as little to
do with the nursing as you possibly can," said the Doctor; "I'd turn her out
of the sick-room, but that I honestly believe she'd die of anxiety. She is
less than no good, and I depend on you and the ayahs, remember."

Mrs. Hauksbee accepted the responsibility, though it painted olive hollows
under her eyes and forced her to her oldest dresses. Mrs. Bent clung to her
with more than childlike faith.

"I know you'll, make Dora well, won't you?" she said at least twenty times a
day; and twenty times a day Mrs. Hauksbee answered valiantly, "Of course I
will."

But Dora did not improve, and the Doctor seemed to be always in the house.

"There's some danger of the thing taking a bad turn," he said; "I'll come over
between three and four in the morning tomorrow."

"Good gracious!" said Mrs. Hauksbee. "He never told me what the turn would be!
My education has been horribly neglected; and I have only this foolish mother-
woman to fall back upon."

The night wore through slowly, and Mrs. Hauksbee dozed in a chair by the fire.
There was a dance at the Viceregal Lodge, and she dreamed of it till she was
aware of Mrs. Bent's anxious eyes staring into her own.

"Wake up! Wake up! Do something!" cried Mrs. Bent, piteously. "Dora's choking
to death! Do you mean to let her die?"

Mrs. Hauksbee jumped to her feet and bent over the bed. The child was fighting
for breath, while the mother wrung her hands despairing.

"Oh, what can I do? What can you do? She won't stay still! I can't hold her.
Why didn't the Doctor say this was coming?" screamed Mrs. Bent. "Won't you
help me? She's dying!"

"I-I've never seen a child die before!" stammered Mrs. Hauksbee, feebly, and
then--let none blame her weakness after the strain of long watching--she broke
down, and covered her face with her hands. The ayahs on the threshold snored
peacefully.

There was a rattle of 'rickshaw wheels below, the clash of an opening door, a
heavy step on the stairs, and Mrs. Delville entered to find Mrs. Bent
screaming for the Doctor as she ran round the room. Mrs. Hauksbee, her hands
to her ears, and her face buried in the chintz of a chair, was quivering with
pain at each cry from the bed, and murmuring, "Thank God, I never bore a
child! Oh! thank God, I never bore a child!"

Mrs. Delville looked at the bed for an instant, took Mrs. Bent by the
shoulders, and said, quietly, "Get me some caustic. Be quick."

The mother obeyed mechanically. Mrs. Delville had thrown herself down by the
side of the child and was opening its mouth.

"Oh, you're killing her!" cried Mrs. Bent. "Where's the Doctor! Leave her
alone!"

Mrs. Delville made no reply for a minute, but busied herself with the child.

"Now the caustic, and hold a lamp behind my shoulder. Will you do as you are
told? The acid-bottle, if you don't know what I mean," she said.

A second time Mrs. Delville bent over the child. Mrs. Hauksbee, her face still
hidden, sobbed and shivered. One of the ayahs staggered sleepily into the
room, yawning: "Doctor Sahib come."

Mrs. Delville turned her head.

"You're only just in time," she said. "It was chokin' her when I came in, an'
I've burned it."

"There was no sign of the membrane getting to the air-passages after the last
steaming. It was the general weakness, I feared," said the Doctor half to
himself, and he whispered as he looked. "You've done what I should have been
afraid to do without consultation."

"She was dyin'," said Mrs. Delville, under her breath. "Can you do anythin'?
What a mercy it was I went to the dance!"

Mrs. Hauksbee raised her head.

"Is it all over?" she gasped. "I'm useless--I'm worse than useless! What are
you doing here?"

She stared at Mrs. Delville, and Mrs. Bent, realizing for the first time who
was the Goddess from the Machine. stared also.

Then Mrs. Delville made explanation, putting on a dirty long glove and
smoothing a crumpled and ill-fitting ball-dress.

"I was at the dance, an' the Doctor was tellin' me about your baby bein' so
ill. So I came away early, an' your door was open, an' I-I lost my boy this
way six months ago, an' I've been tryin' to forget it ever since, an' I-I-I-am
very sorry for intrudin' an' anythin' that has happened."

Mrs. Bent was putting out the Doctor's eye with a lamp as he stooped over
Dora.

"Take it away," said the Doctor. "I think the child will do, thanks to you,
Mrs. Delville. I should have come too late, but, I assure you"--he was
addressing himself to Mrs. Delville--"I had not the faintest reason to expect
this. The membrane must have grown like a mushroom. Will one of you help me,
please?"

He had reason for the last sentence. Mrs. Hauksbee had thrown herself into
Mrs. Delville's arms, where she was weeping bitterly, and Mrs. Bent was
unpicturesquely mixed up with both, while from the tangle came the sound of
many sobs and much promiscuous kissing.

"Good gracious! I've spoilt all your beautiful roses!" said Mrs. Hauksbee,
lifting her head from the lump of crushed gum and calico atrocities on Mrs.
Delville's shoulder and hurrying to the Doctor.

Mrs. Delville picked up her shawl, and slouched out of the room, mopping her
eyes with the glove that she had not put on.

"I always said she was more than a woman," sobbed Mrs. Hauksbee, hysterically,
"and that proves it!"
* * * * * *

Six weeks later, Mrs. Bent and Dora had returned to the hotel. Mrs. Hauksbee
had come out of the Valley of Humiliation, had ceased to reproach herself for
her collapse in an hour of need, and was even beginning to direct the affairs
of the world as before.

"So nobody died, and everything went off as it should, and I kissed The Dowd,
Polly. I feel so old. Does it show in my face?"

"Kisses don't as a rule, do they? Of course you know what the result of The
Dowd's providential arrival has been."

"They ought to build her a statue--only no sculptor dare copy those skirts."

"Ah!" said Mrs. Mallowe, quietly. "She has found another reward. The Dancing
Master has been smirking through Simla giving every one to understand that she
came because of her undying love for him--for him--to save his child, and all
Simla naturally believes this."

"But Mrs. Bent"--

"Mrs. Bent believes it more than any one else. She won't speak to The Dowd
now. Isn't The Dancing Master an angel?"

Mrs. Hauksbee lifted up her voice and raged till bedtime. The doors of the two
rooms stood open.

"Polly," said a voice from the darkness, "what did that American-heiress-
globe-trotter-girl say last season when she was tipped out of her 'rickshaw
turning a corner? Some absurd adjective that made the man who picked her up
explode."

"'Paltry,'" said Mrs. Mallowe. "Through her nose--like this--'Ha-ow pahltry!'"

"Exactly," said the voice. "Ha-ow pahltry it all is!"

"Which?"
                                                       
"Everything. Babies, Diphtheria, Mrs. Bent and The Dancing Master, I whooping
in a chair, and The Dowd dropping in from the clouds. I wonder what the motive
was--all the motives."

"Um!"

"What do you think?"

"Don't ask me. She was a woman. Go to sleep."

*   *   *   *   *   *



ONLY A SUBALTERN

... Not only to enforce by command but to encourage by example the energetic
discharge of duty and the steady endurance of the difficulties and privations
inseparable from Military Service.
--Bengal Army Regulations.

 THEY made Bobby Wick pass an examination at Sandhurst. He was a gentleman
before he was gazetted, so, when the Empress announced that "Gentleman-Cadet
Robert Hanna Wick" was posted as Second Lieutenant to the Tyneside Tail
Twisters at Kram Bokhar, he became an officer and a gentleman, which is an
enviable thing; and there was joy in the house of Wick where Mamma Wick and
all the little Wicks fell upon their knees and offered incense to Bobby by
virtue of his achievements.

Papa Wick had been a Commissioner in his day, holding authority over three
millions of men in the Chota-Buldana Division, building great works for the
good of the land, and doing his best to make two blades of grass grow where
there was but one before. Of course, nobody knew anything about this in the
little English village where he was just 'old Mr. Wick" and had forgotten that
he was a Companion of the Order of the Star of India.

He patted Bobby on the shoulder and said: "Well done, my boy!"

There followed, while the uniform was being prepared, an interval of pure
delight, during which Bobby took brevet-rank as a "man" at the women~swamped
tennis-parties and tea-fights of the village, and, I dare say, had his
joining-time been extended, would have fallen in love with several girls at
once. Little country villages at Home are very full of nice girls, because all
the young men come out to India to make their fortunes.

"India," said Papa Wick, "is the place. I've had thirty years of it and,
begad, I'd like to go back again. When you join the Tail Twisters you'll be
among friends, if every one hasn't forgotten Wick of Chota-Buldana, and a lot
of people will be kind to you for our sakes. The mother will tell you more
about outfit than I can, but remember this. Stick to your Regiment, Bobby--
stick to your Regiment. You'll see men all round you going into the Staff
Corps, and doing every possible sort of duty but regimental, and you may be
tempted to follow suit. Now so long as you keep within your allowance, and I
haven't stinted you there, stick to the Line, the whole Line and nothing but
the Line. Be careful how you back another young fool's bill, and if you fall
in love with a woman twenty years older than yourself, don't tell me about it,
that's all."

 With these counsels, and many others equally valuable, did Papa Wick fortify
Bobby ere that last awful night at Portsmouth when the Officers' Quarters held
more inmates than were provided for by the Regulations, and the liberty-men of
the ships fell foul of the drafts for India, and the battle raged from the
Dockyard Gates even to the slums of Longport, while the drabs of Fratton came
down and scratched the faces of the Queen's Officers.

Bobby Wick, with an ugly bruise on his freckled nose, a sick and shaky
detachment to manoeuvre inship and the comfort of fifty scornful females to
attend to, had no time to feel homesick till the Malabar reached mid-Channel,
when he doubled his emotions with a little guard-visiting and a great many
other matters.

The Tail Twisters were a most particular Regiment. Those who knew them least
said that they were eaten up with "side." But their reserve and their internal
arrangements generally were merely protective diplomacy. Some five years
before, the Colonel commanding had looked into the fourteen fearless eyes of
seven plump and juicy subalterns who had all applied to enter the Staff Corps,
and had asked them why the three stars should he, a colonel of the Line,
command a dashed nursery for double-dashed bottle-suckers who put on condemned
tin spurs and rode qualified mokes at the hiatused heads of forsaken Black
Regiments. He was a rude man and a terrible. Wherefore the remnant took
measures [with the half-butt as an engine of public opinion] till the rumor
went abroad that young men who used the Tail Twisters as a crutch to the Staff
Corps, had many and varied trials to endure. However. a regiment had just as
much right to its own secrets as a woman.

When Bobby came up from Deolali and took his place among the Tail Twisters, it
was gently hut firmly borne in upon him that the Regiment was his father and
his mother and his indissolubly wedded wife, and that there was no crime under
the canopy of heaven blacker than that of bringing shame on the Regiment,
which was the best-shooting, best-drilled, best-set-up, bravest, most
illustrious, and in all respects most desirable Regiment within the compass of
the Seven Seas. He was taught the legends of the Mess Plate from the great
grinning Golden Gods that had come out of the Summer Palace in Pekin to the
silver-mounted markhor-horn snuff-mull presented by the last C. 0. [he who
spake to the seven subalterns]. And every one of those legends told him of
battles fought at long odds, without fear as without support; of hospitality
catholic as an Arab's; of friendships deep as the sea and steady as the
fighting-line; of honor won by hard roads for honor's sake; and of instant and
unquestioning devotion to the Regiment--the Regiment that claims the lives of
all and lives forever.

More than once, too, he came officially into contact with the Regimental
colors, which looked like the lining of a bricklayer's hat on the end of a
chewed stick. Bobby did not kneel and worship them, because British subalterns
are not constructed in that manner. Indeed, he condemned them for their weight
at the very moment that they were filling with awe and other more noble
sentiments.

But best of all was the occasion when he moved with the Tail Twisters, in
review order at the breaking of a November day. Allowing for duty-men and
sick, the Regiment was one thousand and eighty strong, and Bobby belonged to
them; for was he not a Subaltern of the Line the whole Line and nothing but
the Line--as the tramp of two thousand one hundred and sixty sturdy ammunition
boots attested. He would not have changed places with Deighton of the Horse
Battery, whirling by in a pillar of cloud to a chorus of "Strong right! Strong
left!" or Hogan-Yale of the White Hussars, leading his squadron for all it was
worth, with the price of horseshoes thrown in; or "Tick" Boileau, trying to
live up to his fierce blue and gold turban while the wasps of the Bengal
Cavalry stretched to a gallop in the wake of the long, lollopping Walers of
the White Hussars.

They fought through the clear cool day, and Bobby felt a little thrill run
down his spine when he heard the tinkle-tinkle-tinkle of the empty cartridge-
cases hopping from the breech-blocks after the roar of the volleys; for he
knew that he should live to hear that sound in action. The review ended in a
glorious chase across the plain--batteries thundering after cavalry to the
huge disgust of the White Hussars, and the Tyneside Tail Twisters hunting a
Sikh Regiment, till the lean lathy Singhs panted with exhaustion. Bobby was
dusty and dripping long before noon, but his enthusiasm was merely focused--
not diminished.

He returned to sit at the feet of Revere, his "skipper," that is to say, the
Captain of his Company, and to be instructed in the dark art and mystery of
managing men, which is a very large part of the Profession of Arms.

"If you haven't a taste that way," said Revere, between his puffs of his
cheroot. "you'll never he able to get the hang of it, but remember Bobby,
'tisn't the best drill, though drill is nearly everything, that hauls a
Regiment through Hell and out on the other side. It's the man who knows how to
handle men--goat-men, swine-men, dog-men, and so on."

"Dormer, for instance," said Bobby. "I think he comes under the head of fool-
men. He mopes like a sick owl."

"That's where you make your mistake, my son. Dormer isn't a fool yet, but he's
a dashed dirty soldier, and his room corporal makes fun of his socks before
kit-inspection. Dormer, being two-thirds pure brute, goes into a corner and
growls."

"How do you know?" said Bobby, admiringly.

"Because a Company commander has to know these things--because, if he does not
know, he may have crime--ay, murder--brewing under his very nose and yet not
see that it's there. Dormer is being badgered out of his mind--big as he is--
and he hasn't intellect enough to resent it. He's taken to quiet boozing and,
Bobby, when the butt of a room goes on the drink, or takes to moping by
himself, measures are necessary to pull him out of himself."

"What measures? 'Man can't run round coddling his men forever."

"No. The men would precious soon show him that he was not wanted. You've got
to"--Here the Color-sergeant entered with some papers; Bobby reflected for a
while as Revere looked through the Company forms.

"Does Dormer do anything, Sergeant?" Bobby asked, with the air of one
continuing an interrupted conversation.

"No, sir. Does 'is dooty like a hortomato," said the Sergeant, wbo delighted
in long words. "A dirty soldier, and 'e's under full stoppages for new kit.
It's covered with scales, sir."

"Scales? What scales?"

"Fish-scales, sir. 'E's always pokin' in the mud by the river an' a-cleanin'
them muchly-fish with 'is thumbs." Revere was still absorbed in the Company
papers, and the Sergeant, who was sternly fond of Bobby, continued,--"'E
generally goes down there when 'e's got 'is skinful, beggin' your pardon, sir,
an' they do say that the more lush in-he-briated 'e is, the more fish 'e
catches. They call 'im the Looney Fish-monger in the Comp'ny, sir."

Revere signed the last paper and the Sergeant retreated.

"It's a filthy amusement," sighed Bobby to himself. Then aloud to Revere: "Are
you really worried about Dormer?"

"A little. You see he's never mad enough to send to a hospital, or drunk
enough to run in, but at any minute he may flare up, brooding and sulking as
he does. He resents any interest being shown in him, and the only time I took
him out shooting he all but shot me by accident."

"I fish," said Bobby, with a wry face. "I hire a country-boat and go down the
river from Thursday to Sunday, and the amiable Dormer goes with me--if you can
spare us both."

"You blazing young fool!" said Revere, but his heart was full of much more
pleasant words.

Bobby, the Captain of a dhoni, with Private Dormer for mate, dropped down the
river on Thursday morning--the Private at the bow, the Subaltern at the helm.
The Private glared uneasily at the Subaltern, who respected the reserve of the
Private.

After six hours, Dormer paced to the stern, saluted, and said--"Beg y'pardon,
sir, but was you ever on the Durh'm Canal?"

"No," said Bobby Wick. "Come and have some tiffin."

They ate in silence. As the evening fell, Private Dormer broke forth, speaking
to himself--"Hi was on the Durh'm Canal, jes' such a night, come next week
twelve month, a-trailin' of my toes in the water." He smoked and said no more
till bedtime.

The witchery of the dawn turned the grey river-reaches to purple, gold, and
opal; and it was as though the lumbering dhoni crept across the splendors of a
new heaven.

Private Dormer popped his head out of his blanket and gazed at the glory below
and around.

"Well--damn-my-eyes!" said Private Dormer, in an awed whisper. "This 'ere is
like a bloomin' gallantry-show!" For the rest of the day he was dumb, but
achieved an ensanguined filthiness through the cleaning of big fish.

The boat returned on Saturday evening. Dormer had been struggling with speech
since noon. As the lines and luggage were being disembarked, he found tongue.

"Beg y'pardon~ sir," he said, "but would you--would you min' shakin' 'ands
with me, sir?"

"Of course not," said Bobby, and he shook accordingly. Dormer returned to
barracks and Bobby to mess.

"He wanted a little quiet and some fishing, I think," said Bobby. "My aunt,
but he's a filthy sort of animal! Have you ever seen him clean 'them, muchly-
fish with 'is thumbs'?"

"Anyhow," said Revere, three weeks later, "he's doing his best to keep his
things clean."

When the spring died, Bobby joined in the general scramble for Hill leave, and
to his surprise and delight secured three months.

"As good a boy as I want," said Revere, the admiring skipper.

"The best of the batch," said the Adjutant to the Colonel. "Keep back that
young skrim-shanker Porkiss, sir, and let Revere make him sit up."

So Bobby departed joyously to Simla Pahar with a tin box of gorgeous raiment.

'Son of Wick--old Wick of Chota-Buldana? Ask him to dinner, dear," said the
aged men.

"What a nice boy!" said the matrons and the maids.

"First-class place, Simla. Oh, ri-ippmg!" said Bobby Wick, and ordered new
white cord breeches on the strength of it.

"We're in a had way," wrote Revere to Bobby at the end of two months. "Since
you left, the Regiment has taken to fever and is fairly rotten with it--two
hundred in hospital, about a hundred in cells--drinking to keep off fever--and
the Companies on parade fifteen file strong at the outside. There's rather
more sickness in the out-villages than I care for, hut then I'm so blistered
with prickly-heat that I'm ready to hang myself. What's the yarn about your
mashing a Miss Haverley up there? Not serious, I hope? You're over-young to
hang millstones round your neck, and the Colonel will turf you out of that in
double-quick time if you attempt it."

It was not the Colonel that brought Bobby out of Simla, but a much more to be
respected Commandant. The sick ness in the out-villages spread, the Bazar was
put out of bounds, and then came the news that the Tail Twisters must go into
camp. The message flashed to the Hill stations.--"Cholera--Leave stopped--
Officers recalled." Alas, for the white gloves in the neatly soldered boxes,
the rides and the dances and picnics that were to he, the loves half spoken,
and the debts unpaid! Without demur and without question, fast as tongue could
fly or pony gallop, hack to their Regiments and their Batteries, as though
they were hastening to their weddings, fled the subalterns.

Bobby received his orders on returning from a dance at Viceregal Lodge where
he had--but only the Haverley girl knows what Bobby had said or how many
waltzes he had claimed for the next ball. Six in the morning saw Bobby at the
Tonga Office in the drenching rain, the whirl of the last waltz still in his
ears, and an intoxication due neither to wine nor waltzing in his brain.

"Good man!" shouted Deighton of the Horse Battery, through the mists. "Whar
you raise dat tonga? I'm coming with you. Ow! But I've had a head and a half.
I didn't sit out all night. They say the Battery's awful bad," and he hummed
dolorously--
Leave the what at the what's-its-name,
Leave the flock without shelter,
Leave the corpse uninterred,
Leave the bride at the altar!

 "My faith! It'll be more bally corpse than bride, though, this journey. Jump
in, Bobby. Get on, Coachman!"

On the Umballa platform waited a detachment of officers discussing the latest
news from the stricken cantonment, and it was here that Bobby learned the real
condition of the Tail Twisters.

"They went into camp," said an elderly Major recalled from the whist-tables at
Mussoorie to a sickly Native Regiment, "they went into camp with two hundred
and ten sick in carts. Two hundred and ten fever cases only, and the balance
looking like so many ghosts with sore eyes. A Madras Regiment could have
walked through 'em."

"But they were as fit as be-damned when I left them!" said Bobby.

"Then you'd better make them as fit as be-damned when you rejoin," said the
Major, brutally.

Bobby pressed his forehead against the rain-splashed windowpane as the train
lumbered across the sodden Doab, and prayed for the health of the Tyneside
Tail Twisters. Naini Tal had sent down her contingent with all speed; the
lathering ponies of the Dalhousie Road staggered into Pathankot, taxed to the
full stretch of their strength; while from cloudy Darjiling the Calcutta Mail
whirled up the last straggler of the little army that was to fight a fight, in
which was neither medal nor honor for the winning, against an enemy none other
than "the sickness that destroyeth in the noonday."

And as each man reported himself, he said: "This is a bad business," and went
about his own forthwith, for every Regiment and Battery in the cantonment was
under canvas, the sickness bearing them company.

Bobby fought his way through the rain to the Tail Twisters' temporary mess,
and Revere could have fallen on the boy's neck for the joy of seeing that
ugly, wholesome phiz once more.

"Keep 'em amused and interested," said Revere. "They went on the drink, poor
fools, after the first two cases, and there was no improvement. Oh, it's good
to have you back, Bobby! Porkiss is a--never mind."

Deighton came over from the Artillery camp to attend a dreary mess dinner, and
contributed to the general gloom by nearly weeping over the condition of his
beloved Battery. Porkiss so far forgot himself as to insinuate that the
presence of the officers could do no earthly good, and that the best thing
would be to send the entire Regiment into hospital and "let the doctors look
after them." Porkiss was demoralized with fear, nor was his peace of mind
restored when Revere said coldly: "Oh! The sooner you go out the better, if
that's your way of thinking. Any public school could send us fifty good men in
your place, but it takes time, time, Porkiss, and money, and a certain amount
of trouble, to make a Regiment. 'S'pose you're the person we go into camp for,
eh?"

Whereupon Porkiss was overtaken with a great and chilly fear which a drenching
in the rain did not allay, and, two days later, quitted this world for another
where, men do fondly hope, allowances are made for the weaknesses of the
flesh. The Regimental Sergeant-Major looked wearily across the Sergeants' Mess
tent when the news was announced.

"There goes the worst of them," he said. "It'll take the best, and then,
please God, it'll stop." The Sergeants were silent till one said: "It couldn't
be him!" and all knew of whom Travis was thinking.

Bobby Wick stormed through the tents of his Company, rallying, rebuking
mildly, as is consistent with the Regulations, chaffing the faint-hearted:
haling the sound into the watery sunlight when there was a break in the
weather, and bidding them be of good cheer for their trouble was nearly at an
end; scuttling on his dun pony round the outskirts of the camp and heading
back men who, with the innate perversity of British soldier's, were always
wandering into infected villages, or drinking deeply from rain-flooded
marshes; comforting the panic-stricken with rude speech, and more than once
tending the dying who had no friends--the men without "townies"; organizing,
with banjos and burned cork, Sing-songs which should allow the talent of the
Regiment full play; and generally, as he explained, "playing the giddy garden-
goat all round."

"You're worth half a dozen of us, Bobby," said Revere in a moment of
enthusiasm. "How the devil do you keep it up?"

Bobby made no answer, but had Revere looked into the breast-pocket of his coat
he might have seen there a sheaf of badly-written letters which perhaps
accounted for the power that possessed the boy. A letter came to Bobby every
other day. The spelling was not above reproach, but the sentiments must have
been most satisfactory, for on receipt Bobby's eyes softened marvelously, and
he was wont to fall into a tender abstraction for a while ere, shaking his
cropped head, he charged into his work.

By what power he drew after him the hearts of the roughest, and the Tail
Twisters counted in their ranks some rough diamonds indeed, was a mystery to
both skipper and C. O., who learned from the regimental chaplain that Bobby
was considerably more in request in the hospital tents than the Reverend John
Emery.

"The men seem fond of you. Are you in the hospitals much?" said the Colonel,
who did his daily round and ordered the men to get well with a hardness that
did not cover his bitter grief.

"A little, sir," said Bobby.

"Shouldn't go there too often if I were you. They say it's not contagious, but
there's no use in running unnecessary risks. We can't afford to have you down,
y'know."

Six days later, it was with the utmost difficulty that the post-runner plashed
his way out to the camp with mailbags, for the rain was falling in torrents.
Bobby received a letter, bore it off to his tent, and, the programme for the
next week's Sing-song being satisfactorily disposed of, sat down to answer it.
For an hour the unhandy pen toiled over the paper, and where sentiment rose to
more than normal tide-level Bobby Wick stuck out his tongue and breathed
heavily. He was not used to letter-writing.

"Beg y'pardon, sir," said a voice at the tent door; "but Dormer's 'orrid bad,
sir, an' they've taken him orf, sir.

"Damn Private Dormer and you too!" said Bobby Wick running the blotter over
the half-finished letter. "Tell him I'll come in the morning."

"'E's awful bad, sir," said the voice, hesitatingly. There was an undecided
squelching of heavy boots.

"Well?" said Bobby, impatiently.

"Excusin' 'imself before an' for takin' the liberty, 'e says it would be a
comfort for to assist 'im, sir, if"--

"Tattoo lao! Get my pony! Here, come in out of the rain till I'm ready. What
blasted nuisances you are! That's brandy. Drink some; you want it. Hang on to
my stirrup and tell me if I go mo fast."

Strengthened by a four-finger "nip" which he swallowed without a wink, the
Hospital Orderly kept up with the slipping, mud-stained, and very disgusted
pony as it shambled to the hospital tent.

Private Dormer was certainly " 'orrid bad." He had all but reached the stage
of collapse and was not pleasant to look upon.

"What's this, Dormer?" said Bobby, bending over the man. "You're not going out
this time. You've got to come fishin' with me once or twice more yet."

The blue lips parted and in the ghost of a whisper said,--"Beg y'pardon, sir,
disturbin' of you now, but would you min' 'oldin' my 'and, sir?"

Bobby sat on the side of the bed, and the icy cold hand closed on his own like
a vice, forcing a lady's ring which was on the little finger deep into the
flesh. Bobby set his lips and waited, the water dripping from the hem of his
trousers. An hour passed and the grasp of the hand did not relax, nor did the
expression on the drawn face change. Bobby with infinite craft lit himself a
cheroot with the left hand--his right arm was numbed to the elbow--and
resigned himself to a night of pain.

Dawn showed a very white-faced Subaltern sitting on the side of a sick man's
cot, and a Doctor in the doorway using language unfit for publication.

"Have you been here all night, you young ass?" said the Doctor.

"There or thereabouts," said Bobby, ruefully. "He's frozen on to me."

Dormer's mouth shut with a click. He turned his head and sighed. The clinging
band opened, and Bobby's arm fell useless at his side.

"He'll do," said the Doctor, quietly. "It must have been a toss-up all through
the night. 'Think you're to be congratulated on this case."

"Oh, bosh!" said Bobby. "I thought the man had gone out long ago--only--only I
didn't care to take my hand away. Rub my arm down, there's a good chap. What a
grip the brute has! I'm chilled to the marrow!" He passed out of the tent
shivering.

Private Dormer was allowed to celebrate his repulse of Death by strong waters.
Four days later, he sat on the side of his cot and said to the patients
mildly: "I'd 'a' liken to 'a' spoken to 'im--so I should."

But at that time Bobby was reading yet another letter--he had the most
persistent correspondent of any man in camp--and was even then about to write
that the sickness had abated, and in another week at the outside would be
gone. He did not intend to say that the chill of a sick man's hand seemed to
have struck into the heart whose capacities for affection he dwelt on at such
length. He did intend to enclose the illustrated programme of the forthcoming
Sing-song whereof he was not a little proud. He also intended to write on many
other matters which do not concern us, and doubtless would have done so but
for the slight feverish headache which made him dull and unresponsive at mess.

"You are overdoing it, Bobby," said his skipper. "'Might give the rest of us
credit of doing a little work. You go on as if you were the whole Mess rolled
into one. Take it easy."

"I will," said Bobby. "I'm feeling done up, somehow." Revere looked at him
anxiously and said nothing.

There was a flickering of lanterns ab3ut the camp that night, and a rumor that
brought men out of their cots to the tent doors, a paddling of the naked feet
of doolie-bearers and the rush of a galloping horse.

"Wot's up?" asked twenty tents; and through twenty tents ran the answer--
"Wick, 'e's down."

They brought the news to Revere and he groaned. "Any one but Bobby and I
shouldn't have cared! The Sergeant-Major was right."

"Not going out this journey," gasped Bobby, as he was lifted from the doolie.
"Not going out this journey." Then with an air of supreme conviction--"I
can't, you see."

"Not if I can do anything!" said the Surgeon-Major, who had hastened over from
the mess where he had been dining.

He and the Regimental Surgeon fought together with Death for the life of Bobby
Wick. Their work was interrupted by a hairy apparition in a blue-grey
dressing-gown who stared in horror at the bed and cried--"Oh, my Gawd. It
can't be 'im!" until an indignant Hospital Orderly whisked him away.

If care of man and desire to live could have done aught, Bobby would have been
saved. As it was, he made a fight of three days, and the Surgeon-Major's brow
uncreased. "We'll save him yet," he said; and the Surgeon, who, though he
ranked with the Captain, had a very youthful heart, went out upon the word and
pranced joyously in the mud.

"Not going out this journey," whispered Bobby Wick, gallantly, at the end of
the third day.

"Bravo!" said the Surgeon-Major. "That's the way to look at it, Bobby."

As evening fell a grey shade gathered round Bobby's mouth, and he turned his
face to the tent wall wearily. The Surgeon-Major frowned.

"I'm awfully tired," said Bobby, very faintly. "What's the use of bothering me
with medicine? I-don't-want-it. Let me alone."

The desire for life had departed, and Bobby was content to drift away on the
easy tide of Death.

"It's no good," said the Surgeon-Major. "He doesn't want to live. He's meeting
it, poor child." And he blew his nose.

Half a mile away, the regimental band was playing the overture to the Sing-
song, for the men had been told that Bobby was out of danger. The clash of the
brass and the wail of the horns reached Bobby's ears.

 Is there a single joy or pain,
 That I should never kno-ow?
 You do not love me, 'tis in vain,
 Bid me goodbye and go!

An expression of hopeless irritation crossed the boy's face, and he tried to
shake his head.

The Surgeon-Major bent down--"What is it? Bobby?"--

"Not that waltz," muttered Bobby. "That's our own--our very ownest own. Mummy
dear."

With this he sank into the stupor that gave place to death early next morning.

Revere, his eyes red at the rims and his nose very white, went into Bobby's
tent to write a letter to Papa Wick which should bow the white head of the ex-
Commissioner of Chota-Buldana in the keenest sorrow of his life. Bobby's
little store of papers lay in confusion on the table, and among them a half-
finished letter. The last sentence ran: "So you see, darling, there is really
no fear, because as long as I know you care for me and I care for you, nothing
can touch me."

Revere stayed in the tent for an hour. When he came out, his eyes were redder
than ever.
* * * * * *

 Private Conklin sat on a turned-down bucket, and listened to a not unfamiliar
tune. Private Conklin was a convalescent and should have been tenderly
treated.

"Ho!" said Private Conklin. "There's another bloomin' orf'cer dead."

The bucket shot from under him, and his eyes filled with a smithyful of
sparks. A tall man in a blue-grey bedgown was regarding him with deep
disfavor.

"You ought to take shame for yourself, Conky! Orf'cer?--bloomin' orf'cer? I'll
learn you to misname the likes of 'im. Hangel! Bloomin' Hangel! That's wot 'e
is!"

And the Hospital Orderly was so satisfied with the justice of the punishment
that he did not even order Private Dormer back to his cot.
*   *   *   *   *


IN THE MATTER OF A PRIVATE

Hurrah! hurrah! a soldier's life for me!
Shout, boys, shout! for it makes you jolly and free.
          --The Ramrod Corps.

People who have seen, say that one of the quaintest spectacles of human
frailty is an outbreak of hysterics in a girls' school. It starts without
warning, generally on a hot afternoon among the elder pupils. A girl giggles
till the giggle gets beyond control. Then she throws up her head, and cries,
"Honk, honk, honk," like a wild goose, and tears mix with the laughter. If the
mistress be wise she will rap out something severe at this point to check
matters. If she be tender-hearted, and send for a drink of water, the chances
are largely in favor of another girl laughing at the afflicted one and herself
collapsing. Thus the trouble spreads, and may end in half of what answers to
the Lower Sixth of a boys' school rocking and whooping together.  Given a week
of warm weather, two stately promenades per diem, a heavy mutton and rice meal
in the middle of the day, a certain amount of nagging from the teachers, and a
few other things, some amazing effects develop. At least this is what folk say
who have had experience.

Now, the Mother Superior of a Convent and the Colonel of a British Infantry
Regiment would be justly shocked at any comparison being made between their
respective charges. But it is a fact that, under certain circumstances, Thomas
in bulk can be worked up into dithering, rippling hysteria. He does not weep,
but he shows his trouble unmistakably, and the consequences get into the
newspapers, and all the good people who hardly know a Martini from a Snider
say: "Take away the brute's ammunition!"

Thomas isn't a brute, and his business, which is to look after the virtuous
people, demands that he shall have his ammunition to his hand. He doesn't wear
silk stockings, and he really ought to be supplied with a new Adjective to
help him to express his opinions; but, for all that, he is a great man. If you
call him "the heroic defender of the national honor" one day, and "a brutal
and licentious soldiery" the next, you naturally bewilder him, and he looks
upon you with suspicion. There is nobody to speak for Thomas except people who
have theories to work off on him; and nobody understands Thomas except Thomas,
and he does not always know what is the matter with himself.

That is the prologue. This is the story:

Corporal Slane was engaged to be married to Miss Jhansi M'Kenna, whose history
is well known in the regiment and elsewhere. He had his Colonel's permission,
and, being popular with the men, every arrangement had been made to give the
wedding what Private Ortheris called "eeklar." It fell in the heart of the hot
weather, and, after the wedding, Slane was going up to the Hills with the
Bride. None the less, Slane's grievance was that the affair would he only a
hired-carriage wedding, and he felt that the "eeklar" of that was meagre. Miss
M'Kenna did not care so much. The Sergeant's wife was helping her to make her
wedding-dress, and she was very busy. Slane was, just then, the only
moderately contented man in barracks. All the rest were more or less
miserable.

And they had so much to make them happy, too. All their work was over at eight
in the morning, and for the rest of the day they could lie on their backs and
smoke Canteen-plug and swear at the punkah-coolies. They enjoyed a fine, full
flesh meal in the middle of the day, and then threw themselves down on their
cots and sweated and slept till it was cool enough to go out with their
"towny," whose vocabulary contained less than six hundred words, and the
Adjective, and whose views on every conceivable question they had heard many
times before.

There was the Canteen, of course, and there was the Temperance Room with the
second-hand papers in it; but a man of any profession cannot read for eight
hours a day in a temperature of 96 degrees or 98 degrees in the shade, running
up sometimes to 103 degrees at midnight. Very few men, even though they get a
pannikin of flat, stale, muddy beer and hide it under their cots, can continue
drinking for six hours a day. One man tried, but he died, and nearly the whole
regiment went to his funeral because it gave them something to do. It was too
early for the excitement of fever or cholera. The men could only wait and wait
and wait, and watch the shadow of the barrack creeping across the blinding
white dust. That was a gay life.

They lounged about cantonments--it was too hot for any sort of game, and
almost too hot for vice--and fuddled themselves in the evening, and filled
themselves to distension with the healthy nitrogenous food provided for them,
and the more they stoked the less exercise they took and more explosive they
grew. Then tempers began to wear away, and men fell a-brooding over insults
real or imaginary, for they had nothing else to think of. The tone of the
repartees changed, and instead of saying light-heartedly: "I'll knock your
silly face in," men grew laboriously polite and hinted that the cantonments
were not big enough for themselves and their enemy, and that there would he
more space for one of the two in another place.

It may have been the Devil who arranged the thing, but the fact of the case is
that Losson had for a long time been worrying Simmons in an aimless way. It
gave him occupation. The two had their cots side by side, and would sometimes
spend a long afternoon swearing at each other; but Simmons was afraid of
Losson and dared not challenge him to a fight. He thought over the words in
the hot still nights, and half the hate he felt toward Losson be vented on the
wretched punkah-coolie.

Losson bought a parrot in the bazar, and put it into a little cage, and
lowered the cage into the cool darkness of a well, and sat on the well-curb,
shouting bad language down to the parrot. He taught it to say: "Simmons, ye
so-oor," which means swine, and several other things entirely unfit for
publication. He was a big gross man, and he shook like a jelly when the parrot
had the sentence correctly. Simmons, however, shook with rage, for all the
room were laughing at him--the parrot was such a disreputable puff of green
feathers and it looked so human when it chattered. Losson used to sit,
swinging his fat legs, on the side of the cot, and ask the parrot what it
thought of Simmons. The parrot would answer: "Simmons, ye so-oor." "Good boy,"
Losson used to say, scratching the parrot's head; "ye 'ear that, Sim?"

And Simmons used to turn over on his stomach and make answer: "I 'ear. Take
'eed you don't 'ear something one of these days."

In the restless nights, after he had been asleep all day, fits of blind rage
came upon Simmons and held him till he trembled all over, while he thought in
how many different ways he would slay Losson. Sometimes he would picture
himself trampling the life out of the man, with heavy ammunition-boots, and at
others smashing in his face with the butt, and at others jumping on his
shoulders and dragging the head back till the neckbone cracked. Then his mouth
would feel hot and fevered, and he would reach out for another sup of the beer
in the pannikin.

But the fancy that came to him most frequently and stayed with him longest was
one connected with the great roll of fat under Losson's right ear. He noticed
it first on a moonlight night, and thereafter it was always before his eyes.
It was a fascinating roll of fat. A man could get his hand upon it and tear
away one side of the neck; or he could place the muzzle of a rifle on it and
blow away all the head in a flash. Losson had no right to be sleek and
contented and well-to-do, when he, Simmons, was the butt of the room, Some
day, perhaps, he would show those who laughed at the "Simmons, ye so-oor"
joke, that he was as good as the rest, and held a man's life in the crook of
his forefinger. When Losson snored, Simmons hated him more bitterly than ever.
Why should Losson be able to sleep when Simmons had to stay awake hour after
hour, tossing and turning on the tapes, with the dull liver pain gnawing into
his right side and his head throbbing and aching after Canteen? He thought
over this for many nights, and the world became unprofitable to him. He even
blunted his naturally fine appetite with beer and tobacco; and all the while
the parrot talked at and made a mock of him.

The heat continued and the tempers wore away more quickly than before. A
Sergeant's wife died of heat-apoplexy in the night, and the rumor ran abroad
that it was cholera. Men rejoiced openly, hoping that it would spread and send
them into camp. But that was a false alarm.

It was late on a Tuesday evening, and the men were waiting in the deep double
verandas for "Last Posts," when Simmons went to the box at the foot of his
bed, took out his pipe, and slammed the lid down with a bang that echoed
through the deserted barrack like the crack of a rifle. Ordinarily speaking,
the men would have taken no notice; but their nerves were fretted to fiddle-
strings. They jumped up, and three or four clattered into the barrack-room
only to find Simmons kneeling by his box.

"Owl It's you, is it?" they said and laughed foolishly.  "We t h o u g h t
'twas"--Simmons rose slowly. If the accident had so shaken his fellows, what
would not the reality do?

"You thought it was--did you? And what makes you think?" he said, lashing
himself into madness as he went on; "to Hell with your thinking, ye dirty
spies."

"Simmons, ye so-oor," chuckled the parrot in the veranda, sleepily,
recognizing a well-known voice. Now that was absolutely all.

The tension snapped. Simmons fell back on the arm-rack deliberately,--the men
were at the far end of the room,--and took out his rifle and packet of
ammunition. "Don't go playing the goat, Sim!" said Losson. "Put it down," but
there was a quaver in his voice. Another man stooped, slipped his boot and
hurled it at Simmons's head. The prompt answer was a shot which, fired at
random, found its billet in Losson's throat. Losson fell forward without a
word, and the others scattered.

"You thought it was!" yelled Simmons. "You're drivin' me to it! I tell you
you're drivin' me to it! Get up, Losson, an' don't lie shammin' there--you an'
your blasted parrit that druv me to it!"

But there was an unaffected reality about Losson's pose that showed Simmons
what he had done. The men were still clamoring n the veranda. Simmons
appropriated two more packets of ammunition and ran into the moonlight,
muttering: "I'll make a night of it. Thirty roun's, an' the last for myself.
Take you that, you dogs!"

He dropped on one knee and fired into the brown of the men on the veranda, but
the bullet flew high, and landed in the brickwork with a vicious phat that
made some of the younger ones turn pale. It is, as musketry theorists observe,
one thing to fire and another to be fired at.

Then the instinct of the chase flared up. The news spread from barrack to
barrack, and the men doubled out intent on the capture of Simmons, the wild
beast, who was heading for the Cavalry parade-ground, stopping now and again
to send back a shot and a curse in the direction of his pursuers.

"I'll learn you to spy on me!" he shouted; "I'll learn you to give me dorg's
names! Come on the 'ole lot o' you! Colonel John Anthony Deever, C.B.!"--he
turned toward the Infantry Mess and shook his rifle--"you think yourself the
devil of a man--but I tell you that if you put your ugly old carcass outside
o' that door, I'll make you the poorest-lookin' man in the army. Come out,
Colonel John Anthony Deever, C.B.! Come out and see me practiss on the rainge.
I'm the crack shot of the 'ole bloomin' battalion." In proof of which
statement Simmons fired at the lighted windows of the mess-house.

"Private Simmons, E Comp'ny, on the Cavalry p'rade-ground, Sir, with thirty
rounds," said a Sergeant breathlessly to the Colonel. "Shootin' right and
lef', Sir. Shot Private Losson. What's to be done, Sir?"

Colonel John Anthony Deever, C.B., sallied out, only to be saluted by s spurt
of dust at his feet.

"Pull up!" said the Second in Command; "I don't want my step in that way,
Colonel. He's as dangerous as a mad dog."

"Shoot him like one, then," said the Colonel, bitterly, "if he won't take his
chance, My regiment, too! If it had been the Towheads I could have under
stood."

Private Simmons had occupied a strong position near a well on the edge of the
parade-ground, and was defying the regiment to come on. The regiment was not
anxious to comply, for there is small honor in being shot by a fellow-private.
Only Corporal Slane, rifle in band, threw himself down on the ground, and
wormed his way toward the well.

"Don't shoot," said he to the men round him; "like as not you'll hit me. I'll
catch the beggar, livin'."

Simmons ceased shouting for a while, and the noise of trap-wheels could be
heard across the plain. Major Oldyn, commanding the Horse Battery, was coming
back from a dinner in the Civil Lines; was driving after his usual custom--
that is to say, as fast as the horse could go.

"A orf'cer! A blooming spangled orf'cer," shrieked Simmons; "I'll make a
scarecrow of that orf'cer!" The trap stopped.

"What's this?" demanded the Major of Gunners. "You there, drop your rifle."

"Why, it's Jerry Blazes! I ain't got no quarrel with you, Jerry Blazes. Pass
frien', an' all's well!"

But Jerry Blazes had not the faintest intention of passing a dangerous
murderer. He was, as his adoring Battery swore long and fervently, without
knowledge of fear, and they were surely the best judges, for Jerry Blazes, it
was notorious, had done his possible to kill a man each time the Battery went
out.

He walked toward Simmons, with the intention of rushing him, and knocking him
down.

"Don't make me do it, Sir," said Simmons; "I ain't got nothing agin you. Ah!
you would?"--the Major broke into a run--"Take that then!"

The Major dropped with a bullet through his shoulder, and Simmons stood over
him. He had lost the satisfaction of killing Losson in the desired way: hut
here was a helpless body to his hand. Should be slip in another cartridge, and
blow off the head, or with the butt smash in the white face? He stopped to
consider, and a cry went up from the far side of the parade-ground: "He's
killed Jerry Blazes!" But in the shelter of the well-pillars Simmons was safe
except when he stepped out to fire. "I'll blow yer 'andsome 'ead off, Jerry
Blazes," said Simmons, reflectively. "Six an' three is nine an one is ten, an'
that leaves me another nineteen, an' one for myself." He tugged at the string
of the second packet of ammunition.  Corporal Slane crawled out of the shadow
of a bank into the moonlight.

"I see you!" said Simmons. "Come a bit furder on an' I'll do for you."

"I'm comm'," said Corporal Slane, briefly; "you've done a bad day's work, Sim.
Come out 'ere an' come back with me."

"Come to,"--laughed Simmons, sending a cartridge home with his thumb. "Not
before I've settled you an' Jerry Blazes."

The Corporal was lying at full length in the dust of the parade-ground, a
rifle under him. Some of the less-cautious men in the distance shouted: "Shoot
'im! Shoot 'im, Slane !"

"You move 'and or foot, Slane," said Simmons, "an' I'll kick Jerry Blazes'
'ead in, and shoot you after."

"I ain't movin'," said the Corporal, raising his head; "you daren't 'it a man
on 'is legs. Let go o' Jerry Blazes an' come out o' that with your fistes.
Come an' 'it me. You daren't, you bloomin' dog-shooter!"

"I dare."

"You lie, you man-sticker. You sneakin', Sheeny butcher, you lie. See there!"
Slane kicked the rifle away, and stood up in the peril of his life. "Come on,
now!"

The temptation was more than Simmons could resist, for the Corporal in his
white clothes offered a perfect mark.

"Don't misname me," shouted Simmons, firing as he spoke. The shot missed, and
the shooter, blind with rage, threw his rifle down and rushed at Slane from
the protection of the well. Within striking distance, he kicked savagely at
Slane's stomach, but the weedy Corporal knew something of Simmons's weakness,
and knew, too, the deadly guard for that kick. Bowing forward and drawing up
his right leg till the heel of the right foot was set some three inches above
the inside of the left knee-cap, he met the blow standing on one leg--exactly
as Gonds stand when they meditate--and ready for the fall that would follow.
There was an oath, the Corporal fell over his own left as shinbone met
shinbone, and the Private collapsed, his right leg broken an inch above the
ankle.

"'Pity you don't know that guard, Sim," said Slane, spitting out the dust as
he rose. Then raising his voice, "Come an' take him orf. I've bruk 'is leg."
This was not strictly true, for the Private had accomplished his own downfall,
since it is the special merit of that leg-guard that the harder the kick the
greater the kicker's discomfiture.

Slane walked to Jerry Blazes and hung over him with ostentatious anxiety,
while Simmons, weeping with pain, was carried away. " 'Ope you ain't 'urt
badly, Sir," said Slane. The Major had fainted, and there was an ugly, ragged
hole through the top of his arm. Slane knelt down and murmured. "S'elp me, I
believe 'e's dead. Well, if that ain't my blooming luck all over!"

But the Major was destined to lead his Battery afield for many a long day with
unshaken nerve. He was removed, and nursed and petted into convalescence,
while the Battery discussed the wisdom of capturing Simmons, and blowing him
from a gun. They idolized their Major, and his reappearance on parade brought
about a scene nowhere provided for in the Army Regulations.

Great, too, was the glory that fell to Slane's share. The Gunners would have
made him drunk thrice a day for at least a fortnight. Even the Colonel of his
own regiment complimented him upon his coolness, and the local paper called
him a hero. These things did not puff him up. When the Major offered him money
and thanks, the virtuous Corporal took the one and put aside the other. But he
had a request to make and prefaced it with many a "Beg y'pardon, Sir." Could
the Major see his way to letting the Slane-M'Kenna wedding be adorned by the
presence of four Battery horses to pull a hired barouche? The Major could, and
so could the Battery. Excessively so. It was a gorgeous wedding.
* * * * * *

 "Wot did I do it for?" said Corporal Slane. "For the 'orses 0' course. Jhansi
ain't a beauty to look at, but I wasn't goin' to 'ave a hired turn-out. Jerry
Blazes? If I 'adn't 'a' wanted something, Sim might ha' blowed Jerry Blazes'
blooming 'ead into Hirish stew for aught I'd 'a' cared."

And they hanged Private Simmons--hanged him as high as Haman in hollow square
of the regiment; and the Colonel said it was Drink; and the Chaplain was sure
it was the Devil; and Simmons fancied it was both, but he didn't know, and
only hoped his fate would be a warning to his companions; and half a dozen
"intelligent publicists" wrote six beautiful leading articles on "'The
Prevalence of Crime in the Army."

But not a soul thought of comparing the "bloody-minded Simmons" to the
squawking, gaping schoolgirl with which this story opens.



THE ENLIGHTENMENTS OF PAGETT, M.P.

"Because half a dozen grasshoppers under a fern make the field ring with their
importunate chink while thousands of great cattle, reposed beneath the shadow
of the British oak, chew the cud and are silent, pray do not imagine that
those who make the noise are the only inhabitants of the field--that, of
course, they are many in number or that, after all, they are other than the
little, shrivelled, meagre, hopping, though loud and troublesome insects of
the hour."
              --Burke: "Reflections on the Revolution in France."

They were sitting in the veranda of "the splendid palace of an Indian Pro-
Consul"; surrounded by all the glory and mystery of the immemorial East. In
plain English it was a one-storied, ten-roomed, whitewashed, mud-roofed
bungalow, set in a dry garden of dusty tamarisk trees and divided from the
road by a low mud wall. The green parrots screamed overhead as they flew in
battalions to the river for their morning drink. Beyond the wall, clouds of
fine dust showed where the cattle and goats of the city were passing afield to
graze. The remorseless white light of the winter sunshine of Northern India
lay upon everything and improved nothing, from the whining Persian-wheel by
the lawn-tennis court to the long perspective of level road and the blue,
domed tombs of Mohammedan saints just visible above the trees.

"A Happy New Year," said Orde to his guest. "It's the first you've ever spent
out of England, isn't it?"

"Yes. 'Happy New Year," said Pagett, smiling at the sunshine. "What a divine
climate you have here! Just think of the brown cold fog hanging over London
now!" And he rubbed his hands.

It was more than twenty years since he had last seen Orde, his schoolmate, and
their paths in the world had divided early. The one had quitted college to
become a cog-wheel in the machinery of the great Indian Government; the other
more blessed with goods, had been whirled into a similar position in the
English scheme. Three successive elections had not affected Pagett's position
with a loyal constituency, and he had grown insensibly to regard himself in
some sort as a pillar of the Empire, whose real worth would be known later on.
After a few years of conscientious attendance at many divisions, after
newspaper battles innumerable and the publication of interminable
correspondence, and more hasty oratory than in his calmer moments he cared to
think upon, it occurred to him, as it had occurred to many of his fellows in
Parliament, that a tour to India would enable him to sweep a larger lyre and
address himself to the problems of Imperial administration with a firmer hand.
Accepting, therefore, a general invitation extended to him by Orde some years
before, Pagett bad taken ship to Karachi, and only overnight had been received
with joy by the Deputy-Commissioner of Amara. They had sat late, discussing
the changes and chances of twenty years, recalling the names of the dead, and
weighing the futures of the living, as is the custom of men meeting after
intervals of action.

Next morning they smoked the after-breakfast pipe in the veranda, still
regarding each other curiously, Pagett, in a light grey frock-coat and
garments much too thin for the time of the year, and a puggried sun-hat
carefully and wonderfully made, Orde in a shooting coat, riding breeches,
brown cowhide boots with spurs, and a battered flax helmet. He had ridden some
miles in the early morning to inspect a doubtful river dam. The men's faces
differed as much as their attire. Orde's worn and wrinkled around the eyes,
and grizzled at the temples, was the harder and more square of the two, and it
was with something like envy that the owner looked at the comfortable outlines
of Pagett's blandly receptive countenance, the clear skin, the untroubled eye,
and the mobile, clean-shaved lips.

"And this is India!" said Pagett for the twentieth time staring long and
intently at the grey feathering of the tamarisks.

"One portion of India only. It's very much like this for 300 miles in every
direction. By the way, now that you have rested a little--I wouldn't ask the
old question before--what d'you think of the country?"

"'Tis the most pervasive country that ever yet was seen. I acquired several
pounds of your country coming up from Karachi. The air is heavy with it, and
for miles and miles along that distressful eternity of rail there's no horizon
to show where air and earth separate."

"Yes. It isn't easy to see truly or far in India. But you had a decent passage
out, hadn't you?"

"Very good on the whole. Your Anglo-Indian may be unsympathetic about one's
political views; but he has reduced ship life to a science."

"The Anglo-Indian is a political orphan, and if he's wise he won't be in a
hurry to be adopted by your party grandmothers. But how were your companions,
unsympathetic?"

"Well, there was a man called Dawlishe, a judge somewhere in this country it
seems, and a capital partner at whist by the way, and when I wanted to talk to
him about the progress of India in a political sense (Orde hid a grin, which
might or might not have been sympathetic), the National Congress movement, and
other things in which, as a Member of Parliament, I'm of course interested, he
shifted the subject, and when I once cornered him, he looked me calmly in the
eye, and said: 'That's all Tommy rot. Come and have a game at Bull.' You may
laugh; but that isn't the way to treat a great and important question; and,
knowing who I was, well, I thought it rather rude, don't you know; and yet
Dawlishe is a thoroughly good fellow."

"Yes; he's a friend of mine, and one of the straightest men I know. I suppose,
like many Anglo-Indians, he felt it was hopeless to give you any just idea of
any Indian question without the documents before you, and in this case the
documents you want are the country and the people."

"Precisely. That was why I came straight to you, bringing an open mind to bear
on things. I'm anxious to know what popular feeling in India is really like
y'know, now that it has wakened into political life. The National Congress, in
spite of Dawlishe, must have caused great excitement among the masses?"

"On the contrary, nothing could be more tranquil than the state of popular
feeling; and as to excitement, the people would as soon be excited over the
'Rule of Three' as over the Congress."

"Excuse me, Orde, but do you think you are a fair judge? Isn't the official
Anglo-Indian naturally jealous of any external influences that might move the
masses, and so much opposed to liberal ideas, truly liberal ideas, that he can
scarcely be expected to regard a popular movement with fairness?"

"What did Dawlishe say about Tommy Rot? Think a moment, old man. You and I
were brought up together; taught by the same tutors, read the same books,
lived the same life, and new languages, and work among new races; while you,
more fortunate, remain at home. Why should I change my mind--our mind--because
I change my sky? Why should I and the few hundred Englishmen in my service
become unreasonable, prejudiced fossils, while you and your newer friends
alone remain bright and open-minded? You surely don't fancy civilians are
members of a Primrose League?"

"Of course not, but the mere position of an English official gives him a point
of view which cannot but bias his mind on this question." Pagett moved his
knee up and down a little uneasily as he spoke.

"That sounds plausible enough, but, like more plausible notions on Indian
matters, I believe it's a mistake. You'll find when you come to consult the
unofficial Briton that our fault, as a class--I speak of the civilian now--is
rather to magnify the progress that has been made toward liberal institutions.
It is of English origin, such as it is, and the stress of our work since the
Mutiny--only thirty years ago--has been in that direction. No, I think you
will get no fairer or more dispassionate view of the Congress business than
such men as I can give you. But I may as well say at once that those who know
most of India, from the inside, are inclined to wonder at the noise our
scarcely begun experiment makes in England."

"But surely the gathering together of Congress delegates is of itself a new
thing."

"There's nothing new under the sun When Europe was a jungle half Asia flocked
to the canonical conferences of Buddhism; and for centuries the people have
gathered at Pun, Hurdwar, Trimbak, and Benares in immense numbers. A great
meeting, what you call a mass meeting, is really one of the oldest and most
popular of Indian institutions in this topsy-turvy land, and though they have
been employed in clerical work for generations they have no practical
knowledge of affairs. A ship's clerk is a useful person, but he is scarcely
the captain; and an orderly room writer, however smart he may be, is not the
colonel. You see, the writer class in India has never till now aspired to
anything like command. It wasn't allowed to. The Indian gentleman, for
thousands of years past, has resembled Victor Hugo's noble:

"'Un vrai sire Chatelain Laisse ecrire Le vilain. Sa main digne Quand il signe
Egratigne Le velin.'

"And the little egratignures he most likes to make have been scored pretty
deeply by the sword."

"But this is childish and mediaeval nonsense!"

"Precisely; and from your, or rather our, point of view the pen is mightier
than the sword. In this country it's otherwise. The fault lies in our Indian
balances, not yet adjusted to civilized weights and measures."

"Well, at all events, this literary class represent the natural aspirations
and wishes of the people at large, though it may not exactly lead them, and,
in spite of all you say, Orde, I defy you to find a really sound English
Radical who would not sympathize with those aspirations."

Pagett spoke with some warmth, and he had scarcely ceased when a well-
appointed dog-cart turned into the compound gates, and Orde rose saying: "Here
is Edwards, the Master of the Lodge I neglect so diligently, come to talk
about accounts, I suppose."

As the vehicle drove up under the porch Pagett also rose, saying with the
trained effusion born of much practice: "But this is also my friend, my old
and valued friend Edwards. I'm delighted to see you. I knew you were in India,
but not exactly where."

"Then it isn't accounts, Mr. Edwards," said Orde, cheerily.

"Why, no, sir; I heard Mr. Pagett was coming, and as our works were closed for
the New Year I thought I would drive over and see him."

"A very happy thought. Mr. Edwards, you may not know, Orde, was a leading
member of our Radical Club at Switchton when I was beginning political life,
and I owe much to his exertions. There's no pleasure like meeting an old
friend, except, perhaps, making a new one. I suppose, Mr. Edwards, you stick
to the good old cause?"

"Well, you see, sir, things are different out here. There's precious little
one can find to say against the Government, which was the main of our talk at
home, and them that do say things are not the sort o' people a man who
respects himself would like to be mixed up with. There are no politics, in a
manner of speaking, in India. It's all work."

"Surely you are mistaken, my good friend. Why I have come all the way from
England just to see the working of this great National movement."

"I don't know where you're going to find the nation as moves to begin with,
and then you'll be hard put to it to find what they are moving about. It's
like this, sir," said Edwards, who had not quite relished being called "my
good friend." "They haven't got any grievance--nothing to hit with, don't you
see, sir; and then there's not much to hit against, because the Government is
more like a kind of general Providence, directing an old-established state of
things, than that at home, where there's something new thrown down for us to
fight about every three months."

"You are probably, in your workshops, full of English mechanics, out of the
way of learning what the masses think."

"I don't know so much about that. There are four of us English foremen, and
between seven and eight hundred native fitters, smiths,  carpenters, painters,
and such like."

"And they are full of the Congress, of course?"

"Never hear a word of it from year's end to year's end, and I speak the talk
too. But I wanted to ask how things are going on at home--old Tyler and Brown
and the rest?"

"We will speak of them presently, but your account of the indifference of your
men surprises me almost as much as your own. I fear you are a backslider from
the good old doctrine, Edwards." Pagett spoke as one who mourned the death of
a near relative.

"Not a bit, Sir, but I should be if I took up with a parcel of baboos,
pleaders, and schoolboys, as never did a day's work in their lives, and
couldn't if they tried. And if you was to poll us English railway men,
mechanics, tradespeople, and the like of that all up and down the country from
Peshawur to Calcutta, you would find us mostly in a tale together. And yet
you'd know we're the same English you pay some respect to at home at 'lection
time, and we have the pull o' knowing something about it."

"This is very curious, but you will let me come and see you, and perhaps you
will kindly show me the railway works, and we will talk things over at
leisure. And about all old friends and old times," added Pagett, detecting
with quick insight a look of disappointment in the mechanic's face.

Nodding briefly to Orde, Edwards mounted his dog-cart and drove off.

"It's very disappointing," said the Member to Orde, who, while his friend
discoursed with Edwards, had been looking over a bundle of sketches drawn on
grey paper in purple ink, brought to him by a Chuprassee.

"Don't let it trouble you, old chap," 'said Orde, sympathetically. "Look here
a moment, here are some sketches by the man who made the carved wood screen
you admired so much in the dining-room, and wanted a copy of, and the artist
himself is here too."

"A native?" said Pagett.

"Of course," was the reply, "Bishen Singh is his name, and he has two brothers
to help him. When there is an important job to do, the three go into
partnership, but they spend most of their time and all their money in
litigation over an inheritance, and I'm afraid they are getting involved,
Thoroughbred Sikhs of the old rock, obstinate, touchy, bigoted, and cunning,
but good men for all that. Here is Bishen Singh--shall we ask him about the
Congress?"

But Bishen Singh, who approached with a respectful salaam, had never heard of
it, and he listened with a puzzled face and obviously feigned interest to
Orde's account of its aims and objects, finally shaking his vast white turban
with great significance when he learned that it was promoted by certain
pleaders named by Orde, and by educated natives. He began with labored respect
to explain how he was a poor man with no concern in such matters, which were
all under the control of God, but presently broke out of Urdu into familiar
Punjabi, the mere sound of which had a rustic smack of village smoke-reek and
plough-tail, as he denounced the wearers of white coats, the jugglers with
words who filched his field from him, the men whose backs were never bowed in
honest work; and poured ironical scorn on the Bengali. He and one of his
brothers had seen Calcutta, and being at work there had Bengali carpenters
given to them as assistants.

"Those carpenters!" said Bishen Singh. "Black apes were more efficient
workmates, and as for the Bengali babu--tchick!" The guttural click needed no
interpretation, but Orde translated the rest, while Pagett gazed with interest
at the wood-carver.

"He seems to have a most illiberal prejudice against the Bengali," said the
M.P.

"Yes, it's very sad that for ages outside Bengal there should he so bitter a
prejudice. Pride of race, which also means race-hatred, is the plague and
curse of India and it spreads far," Orde pointed with his riding-whip to the
large map of India on the veranda wall.

"See! I begin with the North," said he. "There's the Afghan, and, as a
highlander, he despises all the dwellers in Hindoostan--with the exception of
the Sikh, whom he hates as cordially as the Sikh hates him. The Hindu loathes
Sikh and Afghan, and the Rajput--that's a little lower down across this yellow
blot of desert--has a strong objection, to put it mildly, to the Maratha who,
by the way, poisonously hates the Afghan. Let's go North a minute. The Sindhi
hates everybody I've mentioned. Very good, we'll take less warlike races. The
cultivator of Northern India domineers over the man in the next province, and
the Behari of the Northwest ridicules the Bengali. They are all at one on that
point. I'm giving you merely the roughest possible outlines of the facts, of
course."

Bishen Singh, his clean cut nostrils still quivering, watched the large sweep
of the whip as it traveled from the frontier, through Sindh, the Punjab and
Rajputana, till it rested by the valley of the Jumna.

"Hate -eternal and inextinguishable hate," concluded Orde, flicking the lash
of the whip across the large map from East to West as he sat down. "Remember
Canning's advice to Lord Granville, 'Never write or speak of Indian things
without looking at a map.'"

Pagett opened his eyes, Orde resumed. "And the race-hatred is only a part of
it. What's really the matter with Bishen Singh is class-hatred, which,
unfortunately, is even more intense and more widely spread. That's one of the
little drawbacks of caste, which some of your recent English writers find an
impeccable system."

The wood-carver was glad to be recalled to the business of his craft, and his
eyes shone as he received instructions for a carved wooden doorway for Pagett,
which he promised should be splendidly executed and despatched to England in
six months. It is an irrelevant detail, but in spite of Orde's reminders,
fourteen months elapsed before the work was finished. Business over, Bishen
Singh hung about, reluctant to take his leave, and at last joining his hands
and approaching Orde with bated breath and whispering humbleness, said he had
a petition to make. Orde's face suddenly lost all trace of expression. "Speak
on, Bishen Singh," said he, and the carver in a whining tone explained that
his case against his brothers was fixed for hearing before a native judge and-
-here he dropped his voice still lower till he was summarily stopped by Orde,
who sternly pointed to the gate with an emphatic Begone!

Bishen Singh, showing but little sign of discomposure, salaamed respectfully
to the friends and departed.

Pagett looked inquiry; Orde, with complete recovery of his usual urbanity,
replied: "It's nothing, only the old story, he wants his case to be tried by
an English judge--they all do that--but when he began to hint that the other
side were in improper relations with the native judge I had to shut him up.
Gunga Ram, the man he wanted to make insinuations about, may not be very
bright; but he's as honest as daylight on the bench. But that's just what one
can't get a native to believe."

"Do you really mean to say these people prefer to have their cases tried by
English judges?"

"Why, certainly."

Pagett drew a long breath. "I didn't know that before." At this point a
phaeton entered the compound, and Orde rose with "Confound it, there's old
Rasul Ali Khan come to pay one of his tiresome duty calls. I'm afraid we shall
never get through our little Congress discussion."

Pagett was an almost silent spectator of the grave formalities of a visit paid
by a punctilious old Mahommedan gentleman to an Indian official; and was much
impressed by the distinction of manner and fine appearance of the Mohammedan
landholder. When the exchange of polite banalities came to a pause, he
expressed a wish to learn the courtly visitor's opinion of the National
Congress.

Orde reluctantly interpreted, and with a smile which even Mohammedan
politeness could not save from bitter scorn, Rasul Ali Khan intimated that he
knew nothing about it and cared still less. It was a kind of talk encouraged
by the Government for some mysterious purpose of its own, and for his own part
he wondered and held his peace.

Pagett was far from satisfied with this, and wished to have the old
gentleman's opinion on the propriety of managing all Indian affairs on the
basis of an elective system.

Orde did his best to explain, but it was plain the visitor was bored and
bewildered. Frankly, he didn't think much of committees; they had a Municipal
Committee at Lahore and had elected a menial servant, an orderly, as a member.
He had been informed of this on good authority, and after that, committees had
ceased to interest him. But all was according to the rule of Government, and,
please God, it was all for the best.

"What an old fossil it is!" cried Pagett, as Orde returned from seeing his
guest to the door; "just like some old blue-blooded hidalgo of Spain. What
does he really think of the Congress after all, and of the elective system?"

"Hates it all like poison. When you are sure of a majority, election is a fine
system; but you can scarcely expect the Mahommedans, the most masterful and
powerful minority in the country, to contemplate their own extinction with
joy. The worst of it is that he and his co-religionists, who are many, and the
landed proprietors, also, of Hindu race, are frightened and put out by this
election business and by the importance we have bestowed on lawyers, pleaders,
writers, and the like, who have, up to now, been in abject submission to them.
They say little, but after all they are the most important fagots in the great
bundle of communities, and all the glib bunkum in the world would not pay for
their estrangement. They have controlled the land."

"But I am assured that experience of local self-government in your
municipalities has been most satisfactory, and when once the principle is
accepted in your centres, don't you know, it is bound to spread, and these
important--ah--people of yours would learn it like the rest. I see no
difficulty at all," and the smooth lips closed with the complacent snap
habitual to Pagett, M.P., the "man of cheerful yesterdays and confident
tomorrows."

Orde looked at him with a dreary smile.

"The privilege of election has been most reluctantly withdrawn from scores of
municipalities, others have had to be summarily suppressed, and, outside the
Presidency towns, the actual work done has been badly performed. This is of
less moment, perhaps--it only sends up the local death-rates--than the fact
that the public interest in municipal elections, never very strong, has waned,
and is waning, in spite of careful nursing on the part of Government
servants."

"Can you explain this lack of interest?" said Pagett, putting aside the rest
of Orde's remarks.

"You may find a ward of the key in the fact that only one in every thousand of
our population can spell. Then they are infinitely more interested in religion
and caste questions than in any sort of politics. When the business of mere
existence is over, their minds are occupied by a series of interests,
pleasures, rituals, superstitions, and the like, based on centuries of
tradition and usage. You, perhaps, find it hard to conceive of people
absolutely devoid of curiosity, to whom the book, the daily paper, and the
printed speech are unknown, and you would describe their life as blank. That's
a profound mistake. You are in another land, another century, down on the bed-
rock of society, where the family merely, and not the community, is all-
important. The average Oriental cannot be brought to look beyond his clan. His
life, too, is more complete and self-sufficing, and less sordid and low-
thoughted than you might imagine. It is bovine and slow in some respects, but
it is never empty. You and I are inclined to put the cart before the horse,
and to forget that it is the man that is elemental, not the book. 'The corn
and the cattle are all my care, And the rest is the will of God.' Why should
such folk look up from their immemorially appointed round of duty and
interests to meddle with the unknown and fuss with voting-papers. How would
you, atop of all your interests care to conduct even one-tenth of your life
according to the manners and customs of the Papuans, let's say? That's what it
comes to."

"But if they won't take the trouble to vote, why do you anticipate that
Mohammedans, proprietors, and the rest would be crushed by majorities of
them?"

Again Pagett disregarded the closing sentence.

"Because, though the landholders would not move a finger on any purely
political question, they could be raised in dangerous excitement by religious
hatreds. Already the first note of this has been sounded by the people who are
trying to get up an agitation on the cow-killing question, and every year
there is trouble over the Mohammedan Muharrum processions.

"But who looks after the popular rights, being thus unrepresented?"

"The Government of Her Majesty the Queen, Empress of India, in which, if the
Congress promoters are to be believed, the people have an implicit trust; for
the Congress circular, specially prepared for rustic comprehension, says the
movement is 'for the remission of tax, the advancement of Hindustan, and the
strengthening of the British Government.' This paper is headed in large
letters-'MAY THE PROSPERITY OF THE EMPIRE OF INDIA ENDURE.'"

"Really!" said Pagett, "that shows some cleverness. But there are things
better worth imitation in our English methods of--er--political statement than
this sort of amiable fraud."

"Anyhow," resumed Orde, "you perceive that not a word is said about elections
and the elective principle, and the reticence of the Congress promoters here
shows they are wise in their generation."

"But the elective principle must triumph in the end, and the little
difficulties you seem to anticipate would give way on the introduction of a
well-balanced scheme, capable of indefinite extension."

"But is it possible to devise a scheme which, always assuming that the people
took any interest in it, without enormous expense, ruinous dislocation of the
administration and danger to the public peace, can satisfy the aspirations of
Mr. Hume and his following, and yet safeguard the interests of the
Mahommedans, the landed and wealthy classes, the Conservative Hindus, the
Eurasians, Parsees, Sikhs, Rajputs, native Christians, domiciled Europeans and
others, who are each important and powerful in their way?"

Pagett's attention, however, was diverted to the gate, where a group of
cultivators stood in apparent hesitation.

"Here are the twelve Apostles, hy Jove--come straight out of Raffaele's
cartoons," said the M.P., with the fresh appreciation of a newcomer.

Orde, loth to be interrupted, turned impatiently toward the villagers, and
their leader, handing his long staff to one of his companions, advanced to the
house.

"It is old Jelbo, the Lumherdar, or head-man of Pind Sharkot, and a very
intelligent man for a villager."

The Jat farmer had removed his shoes and stood smiling on the edge of the
veranda. His strongly marked features glowed with russet bronze, and his
bright eyes gleamed under deeply set brows, contracted by lifelong exposure to
sunshine. His beard and moustache streaked with grey swept from bold cliffs of
brow and cheek in the large sweeps one sees drawn by Michael Angelo, and
strands of long black hair mingled with the irregularly piled wreaths and
folds of his turban. The drapery of stout blue cotton cloth thrown over his
broad shoulders and girt round his narrow loins, hung from his tall form in
broadly sculptured folds, and he would have made a superb model for an artist
in search of a patriarch.

Orde greeted him cordially, and after a polite pause the countryman started
off with a long story told with impressive earnestness. Orde listened and
smiled, interrupting the speaker at times to argue and reason with him in a
tone which Pagett could hear was kindly, and finally checking the flux of
words was about to dismiss him, when Pagett suggested that he should be asked
about the National Congress.

But Jelbo had never heard of it. He was a poor man and such things, by the
favor of his Honor, did not concern him.

"What's the matter with your big friend that he was so terribly in earnest?"
asked Pagett, when he had left.

"Nothing much. He wants the blood of the people in the next village, who have
had smallpox and cattle plague pretty badly, and by the help of a wizard, a
currier, and several pigs have passed it on to his own village. 'Wants to know
if they can't be run in for this awful crime. It seems they made a dreadful
charivari at the village boundary, threw a quantity of spell-bearing objects
over the border, a buffalo's skull and other things; then branded a chamur--
what you would call a currier--on his hinder parts and drove him and a number
of pigs over into Jelbo's village. Jelbo says he can bring evidence to prove
that the wizard directing these proceedings, who is a Sansi, has been guilty
of theft, arson, cattle-killing, perjury and murder, but would prefer to have
him punished for bewitching them and inflicting smallpox."

"And how on earth did you answer such a lunatic?"

"Lunatic!--the old fellow is as sane as you or I; and he has some ground of
complaint against those Sansis.  I asked if he would like a native
superintendent of police with some men to make inquiries, but he objected on
the grounds the police were rather worse than smallpox and criminal tribes put
together."

"Criminal tribes--er--I don't quite understand," said Pagett.

"We have in India many tribes of people who in the slack anti-British days
became robbers, in various kind, and preyed on the people. They are being
restrained and reclaimed little by little, and in time will become useful
citizens, but they still cherish hereditary traditions of crime, and are a
difficult lot to deal with. By the way what about the political rights of
these folk under your schemes? The country people call them vermin, but I
suppose they would be electors with the rest."

"Nonsense--special provision would be made for them in a well-considered
electoral scheme, and they would doubtless be treated with fitting severity,"
said Pagett, with a magisterial air.

"Severity, yes--but whether it would be fitting is doubtful. Even those poor
devils have rights, and, after all, they only practice what they have been
taught."

"But criminals, Orde!"

"Yes, criminals with codes and rituals of crime, gods and godlings of crime,
and a hundred songs and sayings in praise of it. Puzzling, isn't it?"

"It's simply dreadful. They ought to be put down at once. Are there many of
them?"

"Not more than about sixty thousand in this province, for many of the tribes
broadly described as criminal are really vagabond and criminal only on
occasion, while others are being settled and reclaimed. They are of great
antiquity, a legacy from the past, the golden, glorious Aryan past of Max
Muller, Birdwood and the rest of your spindrift philosophers."

An orderly brought a card to Orde, who took it with a movement of irritation
at the interruption, and banded it to Pagett; a large card with a ruled border
in red ink, and in the centre in schoolboy copper plate, Mr. Dma Nath. "Give
salaam," said the civilian, and there entered in haste a slender youth, clad
in a closely fitting coat of grey homespun, tight trousers, patent-leather
shoes, and a small black velvet cap. His thin cheek twitched, and his eyes
wandered restlessly, for the young man was evidently nervous and
uncomfortable, though striving to assume a free and easy air.

"Your honor may perhaps remember me," he said in English, and Orde scanned him
keenly.

"I know your face somehow. You belonged to the Shershah district I think, when
I was in charge there?"

"Yes, Sir, my father is writer at Shershah, and your honor gave me a prize
when I was first in the Middle School examination five years ago. Since then I
have prosecuted my studies, and I am now second year's student in the Mission
College--"

"Of course: you are Kedar Nath's son--the boy who said he liked geography
better than play or sugar cakes, and I didn't believe you. How is your father
getting on?"

"He is well, and he sends his salaam, but his circumstances are depressed, and
he also is down on his luck."

"You learn English idioms at the Mission College, it seems."

"Yes, sir, they are the best idioms, and my father ordered me to ask your
honor to say a word for him to the present incumbent of your honor's shoes,
the latchet of which he is not worthy to open, and who knows not Joseph; for
things are different at Shershah now, and my father wants promotion."

"Your father is a good man, and I will do what I can for him."

At this point a telegram was handed to Orde, who, after glancing at it, said
he must leave his young friend whom he introduced to Pagett, "a member of the
English House of Commons who wishes to learn about India."

Orde had scarcely retired with his telegram when Pagett began:

"Perhaps you can tell me something of the National Congress movement?"

"Sir, it is the greatest movement of modern times, and one in which all
educated men like us must join. All our students are for the Congress."

"Excepting, I suppose, Mahommedans, and the Christians?" said Pagett, quick to
use his recent instruction.

"These are some mere exceptions to the universal rule."

"But the people outside the College, the working classes, the agriculturists;
your father and mother, for instance."

"My mother," said the young man, with a visible effort to bring himself to
pronounce the word, "has no ideas, and my father is not agriculturist, nor
working class; he is of the Kayeth caste; but he had not the advantage of a
collegiate education, and he does not know much of the Congress. It is a
movement for the educated young-man"--connecting adjective and noun in a sort
of vocal hyphen.

"Ah, yes," said Pagett, feeling he was a little off the rails, "and what are
the benefits you expect to gain by it?"

"Oh, sir, everything. England owes its greatness to Parliamentary
institutions, and we should at once gain the same high position in scale of
nations. Sir, we wish to have the sciences, the arts, the manufactures, the
industrial factories, with steam engines, and other motive powers and public
meetings, and debates. Already we have a debating club in connection with the
college, and elect a Mr. Speaker. Sir, the progress must come. You also are a
Member of Parliament and worship the great Lord Ripon," said the youth,
breathlessly, and his black eyes flashed as he finished his commaless
sentences.

"Well," said Pagett, drily, "it has not yet occurred to me to worship his
Lordship, although I believe he is a very worthy man, and I am not sure that
England owes quite all the things you name to the House of Commons. You see,
my young friend, the growth of a nation like ours is slow, subject to many
influences, and if you have read your history aright"--

"Sir. I know it all--all! Norman Conquest, Magna Charta, Runnymede,
Reformation, Tudors, Stuarts, Mr. Milton and Mr. Burke, and I have read
something of Mr. Herbert Spencer and Gibbon's 'Decline and Fall,' Reynolds'
'Mysteries of the Court,' and"--

Pagett felt like one who had pulled the string of a shower-bath unawares, and
hastened to stop the torrent with a question as to what particular grievances
of the people of India the attention of an elected assembly should be first
directed. But young Mr. Dma Nath was slow to particularize. There were many,
very many demanding consideration. Mr. Pagett would like to hear of one or two
typical examples. The Repeal of the Arms Act was at last named, and the
student learned for the first time that a license was necessary before an
Englishman could carry a gun in England. Then natives of India ought to be
allowed to become Volunteer Riflemen if they chose, and the absolute equality
of the Oriental with his European fellow-subject in civil status should be
proclaimed on principle, and the Indian Army should be considerably reduced.
The student was not, however, prepared with answers to Mr. Pagett's mildest
questions on these points, and he returned to vague generalities, leaving the
M.P. so much impressed with the crudity of his views that he was glad on
Orde's return to say goodbye to his "very interesting" young friend.

"What do you think of young India?" asked Orde.

"Curious, very curious--and callow."

"And yet," the civilian replied, "one can scarcely help sympathizing with him
for his mere youth's sake. The young orators of the Oxford Union arrived at
the same conclusions and showed doubtless just the same enthusiasm. If there
were any political analogy between India and England, if the thousand races of
this Empire were one, if there were any chance even of their learning to speak
one language, if, in short, India were a Utopia of the debating-room, and not
a real land, this kind of talk might be worth listening to, but it is all
based on false analogy and ignorance of the facts."

"But he is a native and knows the facts."

"He is a sort of English schoolboy, but married three years, and the father of
two weaklings, and knows less than most English schoolboys. You saw all he is
and knows, and such ideas as he has acquired are directly hostile to the most
cherished convictions of the vast majority of the people."

"But what does he mean by saying he is a student of a mission college? Is he a
Christian?"

"He meant just what he said, and he is not a Christian, nor ever will he be.
Good people in America, Scotland and England, most of whom would never dream
of collegiate education for their own sons, are pinching themselves to bestow
it in pure waste on Indian youths. Their scheme is an oblique, subterranean
attack on heathenism; the theory being that with the jam of secular education,
leading to a University degree, the pill of moral or religious instruction may
he coaxed down the heathen gullet."

"But does it succeed; do they make converts?"

"They make no converts, for the subtle Oriental swallows the jam and rejects
the pill; but the mere example of the sober, righteous, and godly lives of the
principals and professors who are most excellent and devoted men, must have a
certain moral value. Yet, as Lord Lansdowne pointed out the other day, the
market is dangerously overstocked with graduates of our Universities who look
for employment in the administration. An immense number are employed, but year
by year the college mills grind out increasing lists of youths foredoomed to
failure and disappointment, and meanwhile, trades, manufactures, and the
industrial arts are neglected, and in fact regarded with contempt by our new
literary mandarins in posse."

"But our young friend said he wanted steam-engines and factories," said
Pagett.

"Yes, he would like to direct such concerns. He wants to begin at the top, for
manual labor is held to be discreditable, and he would never defile his hands
by the apprenticeship which the architects, engineers, and manufacturers of
England cheerfully undergo; and he would be aghast to learn that the leading
names of industrial enterprise in England belonged a generation or two since,
or now belong, to men who wrought with their own hands. And, though he talks
glibly of manufacturers, he refuses to see that the Indian manufacturer of the
future will be the despised workman of the present. It was proposed, for
example, a few weeks ago, that a certain municipality in this province should
establish an elementary technical school for the sons of workmen. The stress
of the opposition to the plan came from a pleader who owed all he had to a
college education bestowed on him gratis by Government and missions. You would
have fancied some fine old crusted Tory squire of the last generation was
speaking. 'These people,' he said, 'want no education, for they learn their
trades from their fathers, and to teach a workman's son the elements of
mathematics and physical science would give him ideas above his business. They
must be kept in their place, and it was idle to imagine that there was any
science in wood or iron work.' And he carried his point. But the Indian
workman will rise in the social scale in spite of the new literary caste."

"In England we have scarcely begun to realize that there is an industrial
class in this country, yet, I suppose, the example of men, like Edwards for
instance, must tell," said Pagett, thoughtfully.

"That you shouldn't know much about it is natural enough, for there are but
few sources of information. India in this, as in other respects, is like a
badly kept ledger--not written up to date. And men like Edwards are, in
reality, missionaries, who by precept and example are teaching more lessons
than they know. Only a few, however, of their crowds of subordinates seem to
care to try to emulate them, and aim at individual advancement; the rest drop
into the ancient Indian caste groove."

"How do you mean?" asked Pagett.

"Well, it is found that the new railway and factory workmen, the fitter, the
smith, the engine-driver, and the rest are already forming separate hereditary
castes. You may notice this down at Jamalpur in Bengal, one of the oldest
railway centres; and at other places, and in other industries, they are
following the same inexorable Indian law."

"Which means?" queried Pagett.

"It means that the rooted habit of the people is to gather in small self-
contained, self-sufficing family groups with no thought or care for any
interests but their own--a habit which is scarcely compatible with the right
acceptation of the elective principle."

"Yet you must admit, Orde, that though our young friend was not able to
expound the faith that is in him, your Indian army is too big."

"Not nearly big enough for its main purpose. And, as a side issue, there are
certain powerful minorities of fighting folk whose interests an Asiatic
Government is bound to consider. Arms is as much a means of livelihood as
civil employ under Government and law. And it would be a heavy strain on
British bayonets to hold down Sikhs, Jats, Bilochis, Rohillas, Rajputs, Bhils,
Dogras, Pathans, and Gurkhas to abide by the decisions of a numerical majority
opposed to their interests. Leave the 'numerical majority' to itself without
the British bayonets--a flock of sheep might as reasonably hope to manage a
troop of collies."

"This complaint about excessive growth of the army is akin to another
contention of the Congress party. They protest against the malversation of the
whole of the moneys raised by additional taxes as a Famine Insurance Fund to
other purposes. You must be aware that this special Famine Fund has all been
spent on frontier roads and defences and strategic railway schemes as a
protection against Russia."

"But there was never a special famine fund raised by special taxation and put
by as in a box. No sane administrator would dream of such a thing. In a time
of prosperity a finance minister, rejoicing in a margin, proposed to annually
apply a million and a half to the construction of railways and canals for the
protection of districts liable to scarcity, and to the reduction of the annual
loans for public works. But times were not always prosperous, and the finance
minister had to choose whether be would bang up the insurance scheme for a
year or impose fresh taxation. When a farmer hasn't got the little surplus he
hoped to have for buying a new wagon and draining a low-lying field corner,
you don't accuse him of malversation, if he spends what he has on the
necessary work of the rest of his farm."

A clatter of hoofs was heard, and Orde looked up with vexation, but his brow
cleared as a horseman halted under the porch.

"Hello, Orde! just looked in to ask if you are coming to polo on Tuesday: we
want you badly to help to crumple up the Krab Bokhar team."

Orde explained that he had to go out into the District, and while the visitor
complained that though good men wouldn't play, duffers were always keen, and
that his side would probably be beaten, Pagett rose to look at his mount, a
red, lathered Biloch mare, with a curious lyrelike incurving of the ears.
"Quite a little thoroughbred in all other respects," said the M.P., and Orde
presented Mr. Reginald Burke, Manager of the Siad and Sialkote Bank to his
friend.

"Yes, she's as good as they make 'em, and she's all the female I possess and
spoiled in consequence, aren't you, old girl?" said Burke, patting the mare's
glossy neck as she backed and plunged.

"Mr. Pagett," said Orde, "has been asking me about the Congress. What is your
opinion?" Burke turned to the M. P. with a frank smile.

"Well, if it's all the same to you, sir, I should say, Damn the Congress, but
then I'm no politician, but only a business man."

"You find it a tiresome subject?"

"Yes, it's all that, and worse than that, for this kind of agitation is
anything but wholesome for the country."

"How do you mean?"

"It would be a long job to explain, and Sara here won't stand, but you know
how sensitive capital is, and how timid investors are. All this sort of rot is
likely to frighten them, and we can't afford to frighten them. The passengers
aboard an Ocean steamer don't feel reassured when the ship's way is stopped,
and they hear the workmen's hammers tinkering at the engines down below. The
old Ark's going on all right as she is, and only wants quiet and room to move.
Them's my sentiments, and those of some other people who have to do with money
and business."

"Then you are a thick-and-thin supporter of the Government as it is."

"Why, no! The Indian Government is much too timid with its money--like an old
maiden aunt of mine--always in a funk about her investments. They don't spend
half enough on railways for instance, and they are slow in a general way, and
ought to be made to sit up in all that concerns the encouragement of private
enterprise, and coaxing out into use the millions of capital that lie dormant
in the country."

The mare was dancing with impatience, and Burke was evidently anxious to be
off, so the men wished him goodbye.

"Who is your genial friend who condemns both Congress and Government in a
breath?" asked Pagett, with an amused smile.

"Just now he is Reggie Burke, keener on polo than on anything else, but if you
go to the Sind and Sialkote Bank tomorrow you would find Mr. Reginald Burke a
very capable man of business, known and liked by an immense constituency North
and South of this."

"Do you think he is right about the Government's want of enterprise?"

"I should hesitate to say. Better consult the merchants and chambers of
commerce in Cawnpore, Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta. But though these bodies
would like, as Reggie puts it, to make Government sit up, it is an elementary
consideration in governing a country like India, which must be administered
for the benefit of the people at large, that the counsels of those who resort
to it for the sake of making money should be judiciously weighed and not
allowed to overpower the rest. They are welcome guests here, as a matter of
course, but it has been found best to restrain their influence. Thus the
rights of plantation laborers, factory operatives, and the like, have been
protected, and the capitalist, eager to get on, has not always regarded
Government action with favor. It is quite conceivable that under an elective
system the commercial communities of the great towns might find means to
secure majorities on labor questions and on financial matters."

"They would act at least with intelligence and consideration."

"Intelligence, yes; but as to consideration, who at the present moment most
bitterly resents the tender solicitude of Lancashire for the welfare and
protection of the Indian factory operative? English and native capitalists
running cotton mills and factories."

"But is the solicitude of Lancashire in this matter entirely disinterested?"

"It is no business of mine to say. I merely indicate an example of how a
powerful commercial interest might hamper a Government intent in the first
place on the larger interests of humanity."

Orde broke off to listen a moment. "There's Dr. Lathrop talking to my wife in
the drawing-room," said he.

"Surely not; that's a lady's voice, and if my ears don't deceive me, an
American."

"Exactly, Dr. Eva McCreery Lathrop, chief of the new Women's Hospital here,
and a very good fellow forbye. Good morning, Doctor," he said, as a graceful
figure came out on the veranda, "you seem to be in trouble. I hope Mrs. Orde
was able to help you."

"Your wife is real kind and good, I always come to her when I'm in a fix but I
fear it's more than comforting I want."

"You work too hard and wear yourself out," said Orde, kindly. "Let me
introduce my friend, Mr. Pagett, just fresh from home, and anxious to learn
his India. You could tell him something of that more important half of which a
mere man knows so little."

"Perhaps I could if I'd any heart to do it, but I'm in trouble, I've lost a
case, a case that was doing well, through nothing in the world but inattention
on the part of a nurse I had begun to trust. And when I spoke only a small
piece of my mind she collapsed in a whining heap on the floor. It is
hopeless."

The men were silent, for the blue eyes of the lady doctor were dim. Recovering
herself she looked up with a smile, half sad, half humorous, "And I am in a
whining heap, too; but what phase of Indian life are you particularly
interested in, sir?"

"Mr. Pagett intends to study the political aspect of things and the
possibility of bestowing electoral institutions on the people."

"Wouldn't it be as much to the purpose to bestow point-lace collars on them?
They need many things more urgently than votes. Why it's like giving a bread-
pill for a broken leg."

"Er--I don't quite follow," said Pagett, uneasily.

"Well, what's the matter with this country is not in the least political, but
an all round entanglement of physical, social, and moral evils and
corruptions, all more or less due to the unnatural treatment of women. You
can't gather figs from thistles, and so long as the system of infant marriage,
the prohibition of the remarriage of widows, the lifelong imprisonment of
wives and mothers in a worse than penal confinement, and the withholding from
them of any kind of education or treatment as rational beings continues, the
country can't advance a step. Half of it is morally dead, and worse than dead,
and that's just the half from which we have a right to look for the best
impulses.  It's right here where the trouble is, and not in any political
considerations whatsoever."

"But do they marry so early?" said Pagett, vaguely.

"The average age is seven, but thousands are married still earlier. One result
is that girls of twelve and thirteen have to bear the burden of wifehood and
motherhood, and, as might be expected, the rate of mortality both for mothers
and children is terrible. Pauperism, domestic unhappiness, and a low state of
health are only a few of the consequences of this. Then, when, as frequently
happens, the boy-husband dies prematurely, his widow is condemned to worse
than death. She may not remarry, must live a secluded and despised life, a
life so unnatural that she sometimes prefers suicide; more often she goes
astray. You don't know in England what such words as 'infant-marriage,' 'baby-
wife,' 'girl-mother,' and 'virgin-widow' mean; but they mean unspeakable
horrors here."

"Well, but the advanced political party here will surely make it their
business to advocate social reforms as well as political ones," said Pagett.

"Very surely they will do no such thing," said the lady doctor, emphatically.
"I wish I could make you understand. Why, even of the funds devoted to the
Marchioness of Dufferin's organization for medical aid to the women of India,
it was said in print and in speech, that they would be better spent on more
college scholarships for men. And in all the advanced parties' talk--God
forgive them--and in all their programmes, they carefully avoid all such
subjects. They will talk about the protection of the cow, for that's an
ancient superstition--they can all understand that; but the protection of the
women is a new and dangerous idea." She turned to Pagett impulsively:

"You are a member of the English Parliament. Can you do nothing? The
foundations of their life are rotten--utterly and bestially rotten. I could
tell your wife things that I couldn't tell you. I know the inner life that
belongs to the native, and I know nothing else; and believe me you might as
well try to grow golden-rod in a mushroom-pit as to make anything of a people
that are born and reared as these--these things 're. The men talk of their
rights and privileges. I have seen the women that bear these very men, and
again--may God forgive the men!"

Pagett's eyes opened with a large wonder. Dr. Lathrop rose tempestuously.

"I must be off to lecture," said she, "and I'm sorry that I can't show you my
hospitals; but you had better believe, sir, that it's more necessary for India
than all the elections in creation."

"That's a woman with a mission, and no mistake," said Pagett, after a pause.

"Yes; she believes in her work, and so do I," said Orde. "I've a notion that
in the end it will be found that the most helpful work done for India in this
generation was wrought by Lady Dufferin in drawing attention--what work that
was, by the way, even with her husband's great name to back it to the needs of
women here. In effect, native habits and beliefs are an organized conspiracy
against the laws of health and happy life--but there is some dawning of hope
now."

"How d'you account for the general indifference, then?"

"I suppose it's due in part to their fatalism and their utter indifference to
all human suffering. How much do you imagine the great province of the Punjab
with over twenty million people and half a score rich towns has contributed to
the maintenance of civil dispensaries last year? About seven thousand rupees."

"That's seven hundred pounds," said Pagett, quickly.

"I wish it was," replied Orde; "but anyway, it's an absurdly inadequate sum,
and shows one of the blank sides of Oriental character."

Pagett was silent for a long time. The question of direct and personal pain
did not lie within his researches. He preferred to discuss the weightier
matters of the law, and contented himself with murmuring: "They'll do better
later on." Then, with a rush, returning to his first thought:

"But, my dear Orde, if it's merely a class movement of a local and temporary
character, how d' you account for Bradlaugh, who is at least a man of sense,
taking it up?"

"I know nothing of the champion of the New Brahmins but what I see in the
papers. I suppose there is something tempting in being hailed by a large
assemblage as the representative of the aspirations of two hundred and fifty
millions of people. Such a man looks 'through all the roaring and the
wreaths,' and does not reflect that it is a false perspective, which, as a
matter of fact, hides the real complex and manifold India from his gaze. He
can scarcely be expected to distinguish between the ambitions of a new
oligarchy and the real wants of the people of whom he knows nothing. But it's
strange that a professed Radical should come to be the chosen advocate of a
movement which has for its aim the revival of an ancient tyranny. Shows how
even Radicalism can fall into academic grooves and miss the essential truths
of its own creed. Believe me, Pagett, to deal with India you want first-hand
knowledge and experience. I wish he would come and live here for a couple of
years or so."

"Is not this rather an ad hominem style of argument?"

"Can't help it in a case like this. Indeed, I am not sure you ought not to go
further and weigh the whole character and quality and upbringing of the man.
You must admit that the monumental complacency with which he trotted out his
ingenious little Constitution for India showed a strange want of imagination
and the sense of humor."

"No, I don't quite admit it," said Pagett.

"Well, you know him and I don't, but that's how it strikes a stranger." He
turned on his heel and paced the veranda thoughtfully. "And, after all, the
burden of the actual, daily unromantic toil falls on the shoulders of the men
out here, and not on his own. He enjoys all the privileges of recommendation
without responsibility, and we--well, perhaps, when you've seen a little more
of India you'll understand. To begin with, our death rate's five times higher
than yours--I speak now for the brutal bureaucrat--and we work on the refuse
of worked-out cities and exhausted civilizations, among the bones of the dead.
In the case of the Congress meetings, the only notable fact is that the
priests of the altar are British, not Buddhist, Jain or Brahminical, and that
the whole thing is a British contrivance kept alive by the efforts of Messrs.
Hume, Eardley, Norton, and Digby."

"You mean to say, then, it's not a spontaneous movement?"

"What movement was ever spontaneous in any true sense of the word? This seems
to be more factitious than usual. You seem to know a great deal about it; try
it by the touchstone of subscriptions, a coarse but fairly trustworthy
criterion, and there is scarcely the color of money in it. The delegates write
from England that they are out of pocket for working expenses, railway fares,
and stationery--the mere pasteboard and scaffolding of their show. It is, in
fact, collapsing from mere financial inanition."

"But you cannot deny that the people of India, who are, perhaps, too poor to
subscribe, are mentally and morally moved by the agitation," Pagett insisted.

"That is precisely what I do deny. The native side of the movement is the work
of a limited class, a microscopic minority, as Lord Dufferin described it,
when compared with the people proper, but still a very interesting class,
seeing that it is of our own creation. It is composed almost entirely of those
of the literary or clerkly castes who have received an English education."

"Surely that's a very important class. Its members must be the ordained
leaders of popular thought."

"Anywhere else they might be leaders, but they have no social weight here."

Pagett laughed. "That's an epigrammatic way of putting it, Orde."

"Is it? Let's see," said the Deputy Commissioner of Amara, striding into the
sunshine toward a half-naked gardener potting roses. He took the man's hoe,
and went to a rain-scarped bank at the bottom of the garden.

"Come here, Pagett," he said, and cut at the sun-baked soil. After three
strokes there rolled from under the blade of the hoe the half of a clanking
skeleton that settled at Pagett's feet in an unseemly jumble of bones. The
M.P. drew back.

"Our houses are built on cemeteries," said Orde. "There are scores of
thousands of graves within ten miles."

Pagett was contemplating the skull with the awed fascination of a man who has
but little to do with the dead. "India's a very curious place," said he, after
a pause.

"Ah? You'll know all about it in three months. Come in to lunch," said Orde.




VOLUME V PLAIN TALES FROM THE HILLS


LISPETH

Look, you have cast out Love! What Gods are these
  You bid me please?
The Three in One, the One in Three? Not so!
  To my own Gods I go.
It may be they shall give me greater ease
Than your cold Christ and tangled Trinities.
         --The Convert.

She was the daughter of Sonoo, a Hill-man, and Jadeh his wife. One year their
maize failed, and two bears spent the night in their only poppy-field just
above the Sutlej Valley on the Kotgarh side; so, next season, they turned
Christian, and brought their baby to the Mission to be baptized. The Kotgarh
Chaplain christened her Elizabeth, and "Lispeth" is the Hill or pahari
pronunciation.

Later, cholera came into the Kotgarh Valley and carried off Sonoo and Jadeh,
and Lispeth became half-servant, half-companion to the wife of the then
Chaplain of Kotgarh. This was after the reign of the Moravian missionaries,
but before Kotgarh had quite forgotten her title of "Mistress of the Northern
Hills."

Whether Christianity improved Lispeth, or whether the gods of her own people
would have done as much for her under any circumstances, I do not know; but
she grew very lovely. When a Hill girl grows lovely, she is worth traveling
fifty miles over bad ground to look upon. Lispeth had a Greek face--one of
those faces people paint so often, and see so seldom. She was of a pale, ivory
color and, for her race, extremely tall. Also, she possessed eyes that were
wonderful; and, had she not been dressed in the abominable print-cloths
affected by Missions, you would, meeting her on the hill-side unexpectedly,
have thought her the original Diana of the Romans going out to slay.

Lispeth took to Christianity readily, and did not abandon it when she reached
womanhood, as do some Hill girls. Her own people hated her because she had,
they said, become a memsahib and washed herself daily; and the Chaplain's wife
did not know what to do with her. Somehow, one cannot ask a stately goddess,
five foot ten in her shoes, to clean plates and dishes. So she played with the
Chaplain's children and took classes in the Sunday School, and read all the
books in the house, and grew more and more beautiful, like the Princesses in
fairy tales. The Chaplain's wife said that the girl ought to take service in
Simla as a nurse or something "genteel." But Lispeth did not want to take
service. She was very happy where she was.

When travellers--there were not many in those years--came to Kotgarh, Lispeth
used to lock herself into her own room for fear they might take her away to
Simla, or somewhere out into the unknown world.

One day, a few months after she was seventeen years old, Lispeth went out for
a walk. She did not walk in the manner of English ladies--a mile and a half
out, and a ride back again. She covered between twenty and thirty miles in her
little constitutionals, all about and about, between Kotgarh and Narkunda.
This time she came back at full dusk, stepping down the breakneck descent into
Kotgarh with something heavy in her arms. The Chaplain's wife was dozing in
the drawing-room when Lispeth came in breathing hard and very exhausted with
her burden. Lispeth put it down on the sofa, and said simply:

"This is my husband. I found him on the Bagi Road. He has hurt himself. We
will nurse him, and when he is well, your husband shall marry him to me."

This was the first mention Lispeth had ever made of her matrimonial views, and
the Chaplain's wife shrieked with horror. However, the man on the sofa needed
attention first. He was a young Englishman, and his head had been cut to the
bone by something jagged. Lispeth said she had found him down the khud, so she
had brought him in.

He was breathing queerly and was unconscious.

He was put to bed and tended by the Chaplain, who knew something of medicine;
and Lispeth waited outside the door in case she could be useful. She explained
to the Chaplain that this was the man she meant to marry; and the Chaplain and
his wife lectured her severely on the impropriety of her conduct. Lispeth
listened quietly, and repeated her first proposition. It takes a great deal of
Christianity to wipe out uncivilized Eastern instincts, such as falling in
love at first sight. Lispeth, having found the man she worshipped, did not see
why she should keep silent as to her choice. She had no intention of being
sent away, either. She was going to nurse that Englishman until he was well
enough to marry her. This was her little programme.

After a fortnight of slight fever and inflammation, the Englishman recovered
coherence and thanked the Chaplain and his wife, and Lispeth--especially
Lispeth--for their kindness. He was a traveller in the East, he said--they
never talked about "globe-trotters" in those days, when the P. & O. fleet was
young and small--and had come from Dehra Dun to hunt for plants and
butterflies among the Simla hills. No one at Simla, therefore, knew anything
about him. He fancied he must have fallen over the cliff while stalking a fern
on a rotten tree-trunk, and that his coolies must have stolen his baggage and
fled. He thought he would go back to Simla when he was a little stronger. He
desired no more mountaineering.

He made small haste to go away, and recovered his strength slowly.

Lispeth objected to being advised either by the Chaplain or his wife; so the
latter spoke to the Englishman, and told him how matters stood in Lispeth's
heart. He laughed a good deal, and said it was very pretty and romantic, a
perfect idyl of the Himalayas; but, as he was engaged to a girl at Home, he
fancied that nothing would happen. Certainly he would behave with discretion.
He did that. Still he found it very pleasant to talk to Lispeth, and walk with
Lispeth, and say nice things to her, and call her pet names while he was
getting strong enough to go away. It meant nothing at all to him, and
everything in the world to Lispeth. She was very happy while the fortnight
lasted, because she had found a man to love.

Being a savage by birth, she took no trouble to hide her feelings, and the
Englishman was amused. When he went away, Lispeth walked with him, up the Hill
as far as Narkunda, very troubled and very miserable. The Chaplain's wife,
being a good Christian and disliking anything in the shape of fuss or scandal-
-Lispeth was beyond her management entirely--had told the Englishman to tell
Lispeth that he was coming back to marry her. "She is but a child, you know,
and, I fear, at heart a heathen," said the Chaplain's wife. So all the twelve
miles up the hill the Englishman, with his arm around Lispeth's waist, was
assuring the girl that he would come back and marry her; and Lispeth made him
promise over and over again. She wept on the Narkunda Ridge till he had passed
out of sight along the Muttiani path.

Then she dried her tears and went in to Kotgarh again, and said to the
Chaplain's wife: "He will come back and marry me. He has gone to his own
people to tell them so." And the Chaplain's wife soothed Lispeth and said: "He
will come back." At the end of two months, Lispeth grew impatient, and was
told that the Englishman had gone over the seas to England. She knew where
England was, because she had read little geography primers; but, of course,
she had no conception of the nature of the sea, being a Hill girl.

There was an old puzzle-map of the World in the House. Lispeth had played with
it when she was a child. She unearthed it again, and put it together of
evenings, and cried to herself, and tried to imagine where her Englishman was.
As she had no ideas of distance or steamboats, her notions were somewhat
erroneous. It would not have made the least difference had she been perfectly
correct; for the Englishman had no intention of coming back to marry a Hill
girl. He forgot all about her by the time he was butterfly-hunting in Assam.
He wrote a book on the East afterwards. Lispeth's name did not appear.

At the end of three months, Lispeth made daily pilgrimage to Narkunda to see
if her Englishman was coming along the road. It gave her comfort, and the
Chaplain's wife, finding her happier, thought that she was getting over her
"barbarous and most indelicate folly." A little later the walks ceased to help
Lispeth and her temper grew very bad. The Chaplain's wife thought this a
profitable time to let her know the real state of affairs--that the Englishman
had only promised his love to keep her quiet--that he had never meant
anything, and that it was "wrong and improper" of Lispeth to think of marriage
with an Englishman, who was of a superior clay, besides being promised in
marriage to a girl of his own people. Lispeth said that all this was clearly
impossible, because he had said he loved her, and the Chaplain's wife had,
with her own lips, asserted that the Englishman was coming back.

"How can what he and you said be untrue?" asked Lispeth.

"We said it as an excuse to keep you quiet, child," said the Chaplain's wife.

"Then you have lied to me," said Lispeth, "you and he?"

The Chaplain's wife bowed her head, and said nothing. Lispeth was silent, too
for a little time; then she went out down the valley, and returned in the
dress of a Hill girl--infamously dirty, but without the nose and ear rings.
She had her hair braided into the long pig-tail, helped out with black thread,
that Hill women wear.

"I am going back to my own people," said she. "You have killed Lispeth. There
is only left old Jadeh's daughter--the daughter of a pahari and the servant of
Tarka Devi. You are all liars, you English."

By the time that the Chaplain's wife had recovered from the shock of the
announcement that Lispeth had 'verted to her mother's gods, the girl had gone;
and she never came back.

She took to her own unclean people savagely, as if to make up the arrears of
the life she had stepped out of; and, in a little time, she married a wood-
cutter who beat her, after the manner of paharis, and her beauty faded soon.

"There is no law whereby you can account for the vagaries of the heathen,"
said the Chaplain's wife, "and I believe that Lispeth was always at heart an
infidel." Seeing she had been taken into the Church of England at the mature
age of five weeks, this statement does not do credit to the Chaplain's wife.

Lispeth was a very old woman when she died. She always had a perfect command
of English, and when she was sufficiently drunk, could sometimes be induced to
tell the story of her first love-affair.

It was hard then to realize that the bleared, wrinkled creature, so like a
wisp of charred rag, could ever have been "Lispeth of the Kotgarh Mission."



THREE AND--AN EXTRA.

"When halter and heel ropes are slipped, do not give chase with sticks but
with gram."
         --Punjabi Proverb.

After marriage arrives a reaction, sometimes a big, sometimes a little one;
but it comes sooner or later, and must be tided over by both parties if they
desire the rest of their lives to go with the current.

In the case of the Cusack-Bremmils this reaction did not set in till the third
year after the wedding. Bremmil was hard to hold at the best of times; but he
was a beautiful husband until the baby died and Mrs. Bremmil wore black, and
grew thin, and mourned as if the bottom of the universe had fallen out.
Perhaps Bremmil ought to have comforted her. He tried to do so, I think; but
the more he comforted the more Mrs. Bremmil grieved, and, consequently, the
more uncomfortable Bremmil grew. The fact was that they both needed a tonic.
And they got it. Mrs. Bremmil can afford to laugh now, but it was no laughing
matter to her at the time.

You see, Mrs. Hauksbee appeared on the horizon; and where she existed was fair
chance of trouble. At Simla her bye-name was the "Stormy Petrel." She had won
that title five times to my own certain knowledge. She was a little, brown,
thin, almost skinny, woman, with big, rolling, violet-blue eyes, and the
sweetest manners in the world. You had only to mention her name at afternoon
teas for every woman in the room to rise up, and call her--well--NOT blessed.
She was clever, witty, brilliant, and sparkling beyond most of her kind; but
possessed of many devils of malice and mischievousness. She could be nice,
though, even to her own sex. But that is another story.

Bremmil went off at score after the baby's death and the general discomfort
that followed, and Mrs. Hauksbee annexed him. She took no pleasure in hiding
her captives. She annexed him publicly, and saw that the public saw it. He
rode with her, and walked with her, and talked with her, and picnicked with
her, and tiffined at Peliti's with her, till people put up their eyebrows and
said: "Shocking!" Mrs. Bremmil stayed at home turning over the dead baby's
frocks and crying into the empty cradle. She did not care to do anything else.
But some eight dear, affectionate lady-friends explained the situation at
length to her in case she should miss the cream of it. Mrs. Bremmil listened
quietly, and thanked them for their good offices. She was not as clever as
Mrs. Hauksbee, but she was no fool. She kept her own counsel, and did not
speak to Bremmil of what she had heard. This is worth remembering. Speaking
to, or crying over, a husband never did any good yet.

When Bremmil was at home, which was not often, he was more affectionate than
usual; and that showed his hand. The affection was forced partly to soothe his
own conscience and partly to soothe Mrs. Bremmil. It failed in both regards.

Then "the A.-D.-C. in Waiting was commanded by Their Excellencies, Lord and
Lady Lytton, to invite Mr. and Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil to Peterhoff on July 26th
at 9.30 P. M."--"Dancing" in the bottom-left-hand corner.

"I can't go," said Mrs. Bremmil, "it is too soon after poor little Florrie--
but it need not stop you, Tom."

She meant what she said then, and Bremmil said that he would go just to put in
an appearance. Here he spoke the thing which was not; and Mrs. Bremmil knew
it. She guessed--a woman's guess is much more accurate than a man's certainty-
-that he had meant to go from the first, and with Mrs. Hauksbee. She sat down
to think, and the outcome of her thoughts was that the memory of a dead child
was worth considerably less than the affections of a living husband.

She made her plan and staked her all upon it. In that hour she discovered that
she knew Tom Bremmil thoroughly, and this knowledge she acted on.

"Tom," said she, "I shall be dining out at the Longmores' on the evening of
the 26th. You'd better dine at the club."

This saved Bremmil from making an excuse to get away and dine with Mrs.
Hauksbee, so he was grateful, and felt small and mean at the same time--which
was wholesome. Bremmil left the house at five for a ride. About half-past five
in the evening a large leather-covered basket came in from Phelps' for Mrs.
Bremmil. She was a woman who knew how to dress; and she had not spent a week
on designing that dress and having it gored, and hemmed, and herring-boned,
and tucked and rucked (or whatever the terms are) for nothing. It was a
gorgeous dress--slight mourning. I can't describe it, but it was what The
Queen calls "a creation"--a thing that hit you straight between the eyes and
made you gasp. She had not much heart for what she was going to do; but as she
glanced at the long mirror she had the satisfaction of knowing that she had
never looked so well in her life. She was a large blonde and, when she chose,
carried herself superbly.

After the dinner at the Longmores, she went on to the dance--a little late--
and encountered Bremmil with Mrs. Hauksbee on his arm.

That made her flush, and as the men crowded round her for dances she looked
magnificent. She filled up all her dances except three, and those she left
blank. Mrs. Hauksbee caught her eye once; and she knew it was war--real war--
between them. She started handicapped in the struggle, for she had ordered
Bremmil about just the least little bit in the world too much; and he was
beginning to resent it. Moreover, he had never seen his wife look so lovely.

He stared at her from doorways, and glared at her from passages as she went
about with her partners; and the more he stared, the more taken was he. He
could scarcely believe that this was the woman with the red eyes and the black
stuff gown who used to weep over the eggs at breakfast.

Mrs. Hauksbee did her best to hold him in play, but, after two dances, he
crossed over to his wife and asked for a dance.

"I'm afraid you've come too late, MISTER Bremmil," she said, with her eyes
twinkling.

Then he begged her to give him a dance, and, as a great favor, she allowed him
the fifth waltz. Luckily it stood vacant on his programme. They danced it
together, and there was a little flutter round the room. Bremmil had a sort of
notion that his wife could dance, but he never knew she danced so divinely. At
the end of that waltz he asked for another--as a favor, not as a right; and
Mrs. Bremmil said: "Show me your programme, dear!" He showed it as a naughty
little schoolboy hands up contraband sweets to a master.

There was a fair sprinkling of "H" on it besides "H" at supper.

Mrs. Bremmil said nothing, but she smiled contemptuously, ran her pencil
through 7 and 9--two "H's"--and returned the card with her own name written
above--a pet name that only she and her husband used. Then she shook her
finger at him, and said, laughing: "Oh, you silly, SILLY boy!"

Mrs. Hauksbee heard that, and--she owned as much--felt that she had the worst
of it. Bremmil accepted 7 and 9 gratefully. They danced 7, and sat out 9 in
one of the little tents. What Bremmil said and what Mrs. Bremmil said is no
concern of any one's.

When the band struck up "The Roast Beef of Old England," the two went out into
the verandah, and Bremmil began looking for his wife's dandy (this was before
'rickshaw days) while she went into the cloak-room. Mrs. Hauksbee came up and
said: "You take me in to supper, I think, Mr. Bremmil." Bremmil turned red and
looked foolish. "Ah--h'm! I'm going home with my wife, Mrs. Hauksbee. I think
there has been a little mistake." Being a man, he spoke as though Mrs.
Hauksbee were entirely responsible.

Mrs. Bremmil came out of the cloak-room in a swansdown cloak with a white
"cloud" round her head. She looked radiant; and she had a right to.

The couple went off in the darkness together, Bremmil riding very close to the
dandy.

Then says Mrs. Hauksbee to me--she looked a trifle faded and jaded in the
lamplight: "Take my word for it, the silliest woman can manage a clever man;
but it needs a very clever woman to manage a fool."

Then we went in to supper.



THROWN AWAY.

"And some are sulky, while some will plunge
  [So ho! Steady! Stand still, you!]
Some you must gentle, and some you must lunge.
  [There! There! Who wants to kill you?]
Some--there are losses in every trade--
  Will break their hearts ere bitted and made,
  Will fight like fiends as the rope cuts hard,
And die dumb-mad in the breaking-yard."
       --Toolungala Stockyard Chorus.

To rear a boy under what parents call the "sheltered life system" is, if the
boy must go into the world and fend for himself, not wise. Unless he be one in
a thousand he has certainly to pass through many unnecessary troubles; and
may, possibly, come to extreme grief simply from ignorance of the proper
proportions of things.

Let a puppy eat the soap in the bath-room or chew a newly-blacked boot. He
chews and chuckles until, by and by, he finds out that blacking and Old Brown
Windsor make him very sick; so he argues that soap and boots are not
wholesome. Any old dog about the house will soon show him the unwisdom of
biting big dogs' ears. Being young, he remembers and goes abroad, at six
months, a well-mannered little beast with a chastened appetite. If he had been
kept away from boots, and soap, and big dogs till he came to the trinity full-
grown and with developed teeth, just consider how fearfully sick and thrashed
he would be! Apply that motion to the "sheltered life," and see how it works.
It does not sound pretty, but it is the better of two evils.

There was a Boy once who had been brought up under the "sheltered life"
theory; and the theory killed him dead. He stayed with his people all his
days, from the hour he was born till the hour he went into Sandhurst nearly at
the top of the list. He was beautifully taught in all that wins marks by a
private tutor, and carried the extra weight of "never having given his parents
an hour's anxiety in his life." What he learnt at Sandhurst beyond the regular
routine is of no great consequence. He looked about him, and he found soap and
blacking, so to speak, very good. He ate a little, and came out of Sandhurst
not so high as he went in.

Them there was an interval and a scene with his people, who expected much from
him. Next a year of living "unspotted from the world" in a third-rate depot
battalion where all the juniors were children, and all the seniors old women;
and lastly he came out to India, where he was cut off from the support of his
parents, and had no one to fall back on in time of trouble except himself.

Now India is a place beyond all others where one must not take things too
seriously--the midday sun always excepted. Too much work and too much energy
kill a man just as effectively as too much assorted vice or too much drink.
Flirtation does not matter because every one is being transferred and either
you or she leave the Station, and never return. Good work does not matter,
because a man is judged by his worst output and another man takes all the
credit of his best as a rule. Bad work does not matter, because other men do
worse, and incompetents hang on longer in India than anywhere else. Amusements
do not matter, because you must repeat them as soon as you have accomplished
them once, and most amusements only mean trying to win another person's money.

Sickness does not matter, because it's all in the day's work, and if you die
another man takes over your place and your office in the eight hours between
death and burial. Nothing matters except Home furlough and acting allowances,
and these only because they are scarce. This is a slack, kutcha country where
all men work with imperfect instruments; and the wisest thing is to take no
one and nothing in earnest, but to escape as soon as ever you can to some
place where amusement is amusement and a reputation worth the having.

But this Boy--the tale is as old as the Hills--came out, and took all things
seriously. He was pretty and was petted. He took the pettings seriously, and
fretted over women not worth saddling a pony to call upon. He found his new
free life in India very good.

It DOES look attractive in the beginning, from a Subaltern's point of view--
all ponies, partners, dancing, and so on. He tasted it as the puppy tastes the
soap. Only he came late to the eating, with a growing set of teeth. He had no
sense of balance--just like the puppy--and could not understand why he was not
treated with the consideration he received under his father's roof. This hurt
his feelings.

He quarrelled with other boys, and, being sensitive to the marrow, remembered
these quarrels, and they excited him. He found whist, and gymkhanas, and
things of that kind (meant to amuse one after office) good; but he took them
seriously too, just as he took the "head" that followed after drink. He lost
his money over whist and gymkhanas because they were new to him.

He took his losses seriously, and wasted as much energy and interest over a
two-gold-mohur race for maiden ekka-ponies with their manes hogged, as if it
had been the Derby. One-half of this came from inexperience--much as the puppy
squabbles with the corner of the hearth-rug--and the other half from the
dizziness bred by stumbling out of his quiet life into the glare and
excitement of a livelier one. No one told him about the soap and the blacking
because an average man takes it for granted that an average man is ordinarily
careful in regard to them. It was pitiful to watch The Boy knocking himself to
pieces, as an over-handled colt falls down and cuts himself when he gets away
from the groom.

This unbridled license in amusements not worth the trouble of breaking line
for, much less rioting over, endured for six months--all through one cold
weather--and then we thought that the heat and the knowledge of having lost
his money and health and lamed his horses would sober The Boy down, and he
would stand steady. In ninety-nine cases out of a hundred this would have
happened. You can see the principle working in any Indian Station. But this
particular case fell through because The Boy was sensitive and took things
seriously--as I may have said some seven times before. Of course, we couldn't
tell how his excesses struck him personally.

They were nothing very heart-breaking or above the average. He might be
crippled for life financially, and want a little nursing.

Still the memory of his performances would wither away in one hot weather, and
the shroff would help him to tide over the money troubles. But he must have
taken another view altogether and have believed himself ruined beyond
redemption. His Colonel talked to him severely when the cold weather ended.
That made him more wretched than ever; and it was only an ordinary "Colonel's
wigging!"

What follows is a curious instance of the fashion in which we are all linked
together and made responsible for one another. THE thing that kicked the beam
in The Boy's mind was a remark that a woman made when he was talking to her.
There is no use in repeating it, for it was only a cruel little sentence,
rapped out before thinking, that made him flush to the roots of his hair. He
kept himself to himself for three days, and then put in for two days' leave to
go shooting near a Canal Engineer's Rest House about thirty miles out. He got
his leave, and that night at Mess was noisier and more offensive than ever. He
said that he was "going to shoot big game, and left at half-past ten o'clock
in an ekka.

Partridge--which was the only thing a man could get near the Rest House--is
not big game; so every one laughed.

Next morning one of the Majors came in from short leave, and heard that The
Boy had gone out to shoot "big game." The Major had taken an interest in The
Boy, and had, more than once, tried to check him in the cold weather. The
Major put up his eyebrows when he heard of the expedition and went to The
Boy's room, where he rummaged.

Presently he came out and found me leaving cards on the Mess.

There was no one else in the ante-room.

He said: "The Boy has gone out shooting. DOES a man shoot

@tetur with a revolver and a writing-case?"

I said: "Nonsense, Major!" for I saw what was in his mind.

He said: "Nonsense or nonsense, I'm going to the Canal now--at once. I don't
feel easy."

Then he thought for a minute, and said: "Can you lie?"

"You know best," I answered. "It's my profession."

"Very well," said the Major; "you must come out with me now--at once--in an
ekka to the Canal to shoot black-buck. Go and put on shikar-kit--quick--and
drive here with a gun."

The Major was a masterful man; and I knew that he would not give orders for
nothing. So I obeyed, and on return found the Major packed up in an ekka--gun-
cases and food slung below--all ready for a shooting-trip.

He dismissed the driver and drove himself. We jogged along quietly while in
the station; but as soon as we got to the dusty road across the plains, he
made that pony fly. A country-bred can do nearly anything at a pinch. We
covered the thirty miles in under three hours, but the poor brute was nearly
dead.

Once I said: "What's the blazing hurry, Major?"

He said, quietly: "The Boy has been alone, by himself, for--one, two, five--
fourteen hours now! I tell you, I don't feel easy."

This uneasiness spread itself to me, and I helped to beat the pony.

When we came to the Canal Engineer's Rest House the Major called for The Boy's
servant; but there was no answer. Then we went up to the house, calling for
The Boy by name; but there was no answer.

"Oh, he's out shooting," said I.

Just then I saw through one of the windows a little hurricane-lamp burning.
This was at four in the afternoon. We both stopped dead in the verandah,
holding our breath to catch every sound; and we heard, inside the room, the
"brr--brr--brr" of a multitude of flies. The Major said nothing, but he took
off his helmet and we entered very softly.

The Boy was dead on the charpoy in the centre of the bare, lime- washed room.
He had shot his head nearly to pieces with his revolver. The gun-cases were
still strapped, so was the bedding, and on the table lay The Boy's writing-
case with photographs. He had gone away to die like a poisoned rat!

The Major said to himself softly: "Poor Boy! Poor, POOR devil!" Then he turned
away from the bed and said: "I want your help in this business."

Knowing The Boy was dead by his own hand, I saw exactly what that help would
be, so I passed over to the table, took a chair, lit a cheroot, and began to
go through the writing-case; the Major looking over my shoulder and repeating
to himself: "We came too late!--Like a rat in a hole!--Poor, POOR devil!"

The Boy must have spent half the night in writing to his people, and to his
Colonel, and to a girl at Home; and as soon as he had finished, must have shot
himself, for he had been dead a long time when we came in.

I read all that he had written, and passed over each sheet to the Major as I
finished it.

We saw from his accounts how very seriously he had taken everything. He wrote
about "disgrace which he was unable to bear"--"indelible shame"--"criminal
folly"--"wasted life," and so on; besides a lot of private things to his
Father and Mother too much too sacred to put into print. The letter to the
girl at Home was the most pitiful of all; and I choked as I read it. The Major
made no attempt to keep dry-eyed. I respected him for that. He read and rocked
himself to and fro, and simply cried like a woman without caring to hide it.
The letters were so dreary and hopeless and touching. We forgot all about The
Boy's follies, and only thought of the poor Thing on the charpoy and the
scrawled sheets in our hands. It was utterly impossible to let the letters go
Home.

They would have broken his Father's heart and killed his Mother after killing
her belief in her son.

At last the Major dried his eyes openly, and said: "Nice sort of thing to
spring on an English family! What shall we do?"

I said, knowing what the Major had brought me but for: "The Boy died of
cholera. We were with him at the time. We can't commit ourselves to half-
measures. Come along."

Then began one of the most grimy comic scenes I have ever taken part in--the
concoction of a big, written lie, bolstered with evidence, to soothe The Boy's
people at Home. I began the rough draft of a letter, the Major throwing in
hints here and there while he gathered up all the stuff that The Boy had
written and burnt it in the fireplace. It was a hot, still evening when we
began, and the lamp burned very badly. In due course I got the draft to my
satisfaction, setting forth how The Boy was the pattern of all virtues,
beloved by his regiment, with every promise of a great career before him, and
so on; how we had helped him through the sickness--it was no time for little
lies, you will understand--and how he had died without pain. I choked while I
was putting down these things and thinking of the poor people who would read
them.

Then I laughed at the grotesqueness of the affair, and the laughter mixed
itself up with the choke--and the Major said that we both wanted drinks.

I am afraid to say how much whiskey we drank before the letter was finished.
It had not the least effect on us. Then we took off The Boy's watch, locket,
and rings.

Lastly, the Major said: "We must send a lock of hair too. A woman values
that."

But there were reasons why we could not find a lock fit to send.

The Boy was black-haired, and so was the Major, luckily. I cut off a piece of
the Major's hair above the temple with a knife, and put it into the packet we
were making. The laughing-fit and the chokes got hold of me again, and I had
to stop. The Major was nearly as bad; and we both knew that the worst part of
the work was to come.

We sealed up the packet, photographs, locket, seals, ring, letter, and lock of
hair with The Boy's sealing-wax and The Boy's seal.

Then the Major said: "For God's sake let's get outside--away from the room--
and think!"

We went outside, and walked on the banks of the Canal for an hour, eating and
drinking what we had with us, until the moon rose. I know now exactly how a
murderer feels. Finally, we forced ourselves back to the room with the lamp
and the Other Thing in it, and began to take up the next piece of work. I am
not going to write about this. It was too horrible. We burned the bedstead and
dropped the ashes into the Canal; we took up the matting of the room and
treated that in the same way. I went off to a village and borrowed two big
hoes--I did not want the villagers to help--while the Major arranged--the
other matters. It took us four hours' hard work to make the grave. As we
worked, we argued out whether it was right to say as much as we remembered of
the Burial of the Dead.

We compromised things by saying the Lord's Prayer with a private unofficial
prayer for the peace of the soul of The Boy. Then we filled in the grave and
went into the verandah--not the house--to lie down to sleep. We were dead-
tired.

When we woke the Major said, wearily: "We can't go back till tomorrow. We must
give him a decent time to die in. He died early THIS morning, remember. That
seems more natural." So the Major must have been lying awake all the time,
thinking.

I said: "Then why didn't we bring the body back to the cantonments?"

The Major thought for a minute:--"Because the people bolted when they heard of
the cholera. And the ekka has gone!"

That was strictly true. We had forgotten all about the ekka-pony, and he had
gone home.

So, we were left there alone, all that stifling day, in the Canal Rest House,
testing and re-testing our story of The Boy's death to see if it was weak at
any point. A native turned up in the afternoon, but we said that a Sahib was
dead of cholera, and he ran away. As the dusk gathered, the Major told me all
his fears about The Boy, and awful stories of suicide or nearly-carried-out
suicide--tales that made one's hair crisp. He said that he himself had once
gone into the same Valley of the Shadow as the Boy, when he was young and new
to the country; so he understood how things fought together in The Boy's poor
jumbled head. He also said that youngsters, in their repentant moments,
consider their sins much more serious and ineffaceable than they really are.
We talked together all through the evening, and rehearsed the story of the
death of The Boy. As soon as the moon was up, and The Boy, theoretically, just
buried, we struck across country for the Station. We walked from eight till
six o'clock in the morning; but though we were dead-tired, we did not forget
to go to The Boy's room and put away his revolver with the proper amount of
cartridges in the pouch. Also to set his writing-case on the table. We found
the Colonel and reported the death, feeling more like murderers than ever.
Then we went to bed and slept the clock round; for there was no more in us.

The tale had credence as long as was necessary, for every one forgot about The
Boy before a fortnight was over. Many people, however, found time to say that
the Major had behaved scandalously in not bringing in the body for a
regimental funeral. The saddest thing of all was a letter from The Boy's
mother to the Major and me--with big inky blisters all over the sheet. She
wrote the sweetest possible things about our great kindness, and the
obligation she would be under to us as long as she lived.

All things considered, she WAS under an obligation; but not exactly as she
meant.



MISS YOUGHAL'S SAIS.

When Man and Woman are agreed, what can the Kazi do?
      --Mahomedan Proverb.

Some people say that there is no romance in India. Those people are wrong. Our
lives hold quite as much romance as is good for us.

Sometimes more.

Strickland was in the Police, and people did not understand him; so they said
he was a doubtful sort of man and passed by on the other side. Strickland had
himself to thank for this. He held the extraordinary theory that a Policeman
in India should try to know as much about the natives as the natives
themselves. Now, in the whole of Upper India, there is only ONE man who can
pass for Hindu or Mohammedan, chamar or faquir, as he pleases. He is feared
and respected by the natives from the Ghor Kathri to the Jamma Musjid; and he
is supposed to have the gift of invisibility and executive control over many
Devils. But what good has this done him with the Government? None in the
world. He has never got Simla for his charge; and his name is almost unknown
to Englishmen.

Strickland was foolish enough to take that man for his model; and, following
out his absurd theory, dabbled in unsavory places no respectable man would
think of exploring--all among the native riff-raff. He educated himself in
this peculiar way for seven years, and people could not appreciate it. He was
perpetually "going Fantee" among the natives, which, of course, no man with
any sense believes in. He was initiated into the Sat Bhai at Allahabad once,
when he was on leave; he knew the Lizard-Song of the Sansis, and the Halli-
Hukk dance, which is a religious can-can of a startling kind. When a man knows
who dances the Halli-Hukk, and how, and when, and where, he knows something to
be proud of. He has gone deeper than the skin. But Strickland was not proud,
though he had helped once, at Jagadhri, at the Painting of the Death Bull,
which no Englishman must even look upon; had mastered the thieves'-patter of
the changars; had taken a Eusufzai horse-thief alone near Attock; and had
stood under the mimbar-board of a Border mosque and conducted service in the
manner of a Sunni Mollah.

His crowning achievement was spending eleven days as a faquir in the gardens
of Baba Atal at Amritsar, and there picking up the threads of the great
Nasiban Murder Case. But people said, justly enough: "Why on earth can't
Strickland sit in his office and write up his diary, and recruit, and keep
quiet, instead of showing up the incapacity of his seniors?" So the Nasiban
Murder Case did him no good departmentally; but, after his first feeling of
wrath, he returned to his outlandish custom of prying into native life. By the
way, when a man once acquires a taste for this particular amusement, it abides
with him all his days. It is the most fascinating thing in the world; Love not
excepted. Where other men took ten days to the Hills, Strickland took leave
for what he called shikar, put on the disguise that appealed to him at the
time, stepped down into the brown crowd, and was swallowed up for a while. He
was a quiet, dark young fellow--spare, black-eyes--and, when he was not
thinking of something else, a very interesting companion. Strickland on Native
Progress as he had seen it was worth hearing. Natives hated Strickland; but
they were afraid of him. He knew too much.

When the Youghals came into the station, Strickland--very gravely, as he did
everything--fell in love with Miss Youghal; and she, after a while, fell in
love with him because she could not understand him. Then Strickland told the
parents; but Mrs. Youghal said she was not going to throw her daughter into
the worst paid Department in the Empire, and old Youghal said, in so many
words, that he mistrusted Strickland's ways and works, and would thank him not
to speak or write to his daughter any more. "Very well," said Strickland, for
he did not wish to make his lady-love's life a burden. After one long talk
with Miss Youghal he dropped the business entirely.

The Youghals went up to Simla in April.

In July, Strickland secured three months' leave on "urgent private affairs."
He locked up his house--though not a native in the Providence would wittingly
have touched "Estreekin Sahib's" gear for the world--and went down to see a
friend of his, an old dyer, at Tarn Taran.

Here all trace of him was lost, until a sais met me on the Simla Mall with
this extraordinary note:

"Dear old man,

Please give bearer a box of cheroots--Supers, No. I, for preference. They are
freshest at the Club. I'll repay when I reappear; but at present I'm out of
Society.

Yours,

E. STRICKLAND."

I ordered two boxes, and handed them over to the sais with my love.

That sais was Strickland, and he was in old Youghal's employ, attached to Miss
Youghal's Arab. The poor fellow was suffering for an English smoke, and knew
that whatever happened I should hold my tongue till the business was over.

Later on, Mrs. Youghal, who was wrapped up in her servants, began talking at
houses where she called of her paragon among saises--the man who was never too
busy to get up in the morning and pick flowers for the breakfast-table, and
who blacked--actually BLACKED--the hoofs of his horse like a London coachman!
The turnout of Miss Youghal's Arab was a wonder and a delight. Strickland--
Dulloo, I mean--found his reward in the pretty things that Miss Youghal said
to him when she went out riding. Her parents were pleased to find she had
forgotten all her foolishness for young Strickland and said she was a good
girl.

Strickland vows that the two months of his service were the most rigid mental
discipline he has ever gone through. Quite apart from the little fact that the
wife of one of his fellow-saises fell in love with him and then tried to
poison him with arsenic because he would have nothing to do with her, he had
to school himself into keeping quiet when Miss Youghal went out riding with
some man who tried to flirt with her, and he was forced to trot behind
carrying the blanket and hearing every word! Also, he had to keep his temper
when he was slanged in "Benmore" porch by a policeman--especially once when he
was abused by a Naik he had himself recruited from Isser Jang village--or,
worse still, when a young subaltern called him a pig for not making way
quickly enough.

But the life had its compensations. He obtained great insight into the ways
and thefts of saises--enough, he says, to have summarily convicted half the
chamar population of the Punjab if he had been on business. He became one of
the leading players at knuckle-bones, which all jhampanis and many saises play
while they are waiting outside the Government House or the Gaiety Theatre of
nights; he learned to smoke tobacco that was three-fourths cowdung; and he
heard the wisdom of the grizzled Jemadar of the Government House saises, whose
words are valuable. He saw many things which amused him; and he states, on
honor, that no man can appreciate Simla properly, till he has seen it from the
sais's point of view.

He also says that, if he chose to write all he saw, his head would be broken
in several places.

Strickland's account of the agony he endured on wet nights, hearing the music
and seeing the lights in "Benmore," with his toes tingling for a waltz and his
head in a horse-blanket, is rather amusing. One of these days, Strickland is
going to write a little book on his experiences. That book will be worth
buying; and even more, worth suppressing.

Thus, he served faithfully as Jacob served for Rachel; and his leave was
nearly at an end when the explosion came. He had really done his best to keep
his temper in the hearing of the flirtations I have mentioned; but he broke
down at last. An old and very distinguished General took Miss Youghal for a
ride, and began that specially offensive "you're-only-a-little-girl" sort of
flirtation--most difficult for a woman to turn aside deftly, and most
maddening to listen to. Miss Youghal was shaking with fear at the things he
said in the hearing of her sais. Dulloo--Strickland--stood it as long as he
could. Then he caught hold of the General's bridle, and, in most fluent
English, invited him to step off and be heaved over the cliff. Next minute
Miss Youghal began crying; and Strickland saw that he had hopelessly given
himself away, and everything was over.

The General nearly had a fit, while Miss Youghal was sobbing out the story of
the disguise and the engagement that wasn't recognized by the parents.
Strickland was furiously angry with himself and more angry with the General
for forcing his hand; so he said nothing, but held the horse's head and
prepared to thrash the General as some sort of satisfaction, but when the
General had thoroughly grasped the story, and knew who Strickland was, he
began to puff and blow in the saddle, and nearly rolled off with laughing. He
said Strickland deserved a V. C., if it were only for putting on a sais's
blanket. Then he called himself names, and vowed that he deserved a thrashing,
but he was too old to take it from Strickland. Then he complimented Miss
Youghal on her lover.

The scandal of the business never struck him; for he was a nice old man, with
a weakness for flirtations. Then he laughed again, and said that old Youghal
was a fool. Strickland let go of the cob's head, and suggested that the
General had better help them, if that was his opinion. Strickland knew
Youghal's weakness for men with titles and letters after their names and high
official position.

"It's rather like a forty-minute farce," said the General, "but begad, I WILL
help, if it's only to escape that tremendous thrashing I deserved. Go along to
your home, my sais-Policeman, and change into decent kit, and I'll attack Mr.
Youghal. Miss Youghal, may I ask you to canter home and wait?
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

About seven minutes later, there was a wild hurroosh at the Club.

A sais, with a blanket and head-rope, was asking all the men he knew: "For
Heaven's sake lend me decent clothes!" As the men did not recognize him, there
were some peculiar scenes before Strickland could get a hot bath, with soda in
it, in one room, a shirt here, a collar there, a pair of trousers elsewhere,
and so on. He galloped off, with half the Club wardrobe on his back, and an
utter stranger's pony under him, to the house of old Youghal.

The General, arrayed in purple and fine linen, was before him.

What the General had said Strickland never knew, but Youghal received
Strickland with moderate civility; and Mrs. Youghal, touched by the devotion
of the transformed Dulloo, was almost kind.

The General beamed, and chuckled, and Miss Youghal came in, and almost before
old Youghal knew where he was, the parental consent had been wrenched out and
Strickland had departed with Miss Youghal to the Telegraph Office to wire for
his kit. The final embarrassment was when an utter stranger attacked him on
the Mall and asked for the stolen pony.

So, in the end, Strickland and Miss Youghal were married, on the strict
understanding that Strickland should drop his old ways, and stick to
Departmental routine, which pays best and leads to Simla.

Strickland was far too fond of his wife, just then, to break his word, but it
was a sore trial to him; for the streets and the bazars, and the sounds in
them, were full of meaning to Strickland, and these called to him to come back
and take up his wanderings and his discoveries. Some day, I will tell you how
he broke his promise to help a friend. That was long since, and he has, by
this time, been nearly spoilt for what he would call shikar. He is forgetting
the slang, and the beggar's cant, and the marks, and the signs, and the drift
of the undercurrents, which, if a man would master, he must always continue to
learn.

But he fills in his Departmental returns beautifully.


YOKED WITH AN UNBELIEVER.

I am dying for you, and you are dying for another.
      --Punjabi Proverb.

When the Gravesend tender left the P. & 0. steamer for Bombay and went back to
catch the train to Town, there were many people in it crying. But the one who
wept most, and most openly was Miss Agnes Laiter. She had reason to cry,
because the only man she ever loved--or ever could love, so she said--was
going out to India; and India, as every one knows, is divided equally between
jungle, tigers, cobras, cholera, and sepoys.

Phil Garron, leaning over the side of the steamer in the rain, felt very
unhappy too; but he did not cry. He was sent out to "tea." What "tea" meant he
had not the vaguest idea, but fancied that he would have to ride on a prancing
horse over hills covered with tea-vines, and draw a sumptuous salary for doing
so; and he was very grateful to his uncle for getting him the berth. He was
really going to reform all his slack, shiftless ways, save a large proportion
of his magnificent salary yearly, and, in a very short time, return to marry
Agnes Laiter. Phil Garron had been lying loose on his friends' hands for three
years, and, as he had nothing to do, he naturally fell in love. He was very
nice; but he was not strong in his views and opinions and principles, and
though he never came to actual grief his friends were thankful when he said
good-bye, and went out to this mysterious "tea" business near Darjiling. They
said:--"God bless you, dear boy! Let us never see your face again,"--or at
least that was what Phil was given to understand.

When he sailed, he was very full of a great plan to prove himself several
hundred times better than any one had given him credit for--to work like a
horse, and triumphantly marry Agnes Laiter. He had many good points besides
his good looks; his only fault being that he was weak, the least little bit in
the world weak. He had as much notion of economy as the Morning Sun; and yet
you could not lay your hand on any one item, and say: "Herein Phil Garron is
extravagant or reckless." Nor could you point out any particular vice in his
character; but he was "unsatisfactory" and as workable as putty.

Agnes Laiter went about her duties at home--her family objected to the
engagement--with red eyes, while Phil was sailing to Darjiling--"a port on the
Bengal Ocean," as his mother used to tell her friends. He was popular enough
on board ship, made many acquaintances and a moderately large liquor bill, and
sent off huge letters to Agnes Laiter at each port. Then he fell to work on
this plantation, somewhere between Darjiling and Kangra, and, though the
salary and the horse and the work were not quite all he had fancied, he
succeeded fairly well, and gave himself much unnecessary credit for his
perseverance.

In the course of time, as he settled more into collar, and his work grew fixed
before him, the face of Agnes Laiter went out of his mind and only came when
he was at leisure, which was not often. He would forget all about her for a
fortnight, and remember her with a start, like a school-boy who has forgotten
to learn his lesson.

She did not forget Phil, because she was of the kind that never forgets. Only,
another man--a really desirable young man--presented himself before Mrs.
Laiter; and the chance of a marriage with Phil was as far off as ever; and his
letters were so unsatisfactory; and there was a certain amount of domestic
pressure brought to bear on the girl; and the young man really was an eligible
person as incomes go; and the end of all things was that Agnes married him,
and wrote a tempestuous whirlwind of a letter to Phil in the wilds of
Darjiling, and said she should never know a happy moment all the rest of her
life. Which was a true prophecy.

Phil got that letter, and held himself ill-treated. This was two years after
he had come out; but by dint of thinking fixedly of Agnes Laiter, and looking
at her photograph, and patting himself on the back for being one of the most
constant lovers in history, and warming to the work as he went on, he really
fancied that he had been very hardly used. He sat down and wrote one final
letter--a really pathetic "world without end, amen," epistle; explaining how
he would be true to Eternity, and that all women were very much alike, and he
would hide his broken heart, etc., etc.; but if, at any future time, etc.,
etc., he could afford to wait, etc., etc., unchanged affections, etc., etc.,
return to her old love, etc., etc., for eight closely-written pages. From an
artistic point of view, it was very neat work, but an ordinary Philistine, who
knew the state of Phil's real feelings--not the ones he rose to as he went on
writing--would have called it the thoroughly mean and selfish work of a
thoroughly mean and selfish, weak man. But this verdict would have been
incorrect. Phil paid for the postage, and felt every word he had written for
at least two days and a half.

It was the last flicker before the light went out.

That letter made Agnes Laiter very unhappy, and she cried and put it away in
her desk, and became Mrs. Somebody Else for the good of her family. Which is
the first duty of every Christian maid.

Phil went his ways, and thought no more of his letter, except as an artist
thinks of a neatly touched-in sketch. His ways were not bad, but they were not
altogether good until they brought him across Dunmaya, the daughter of a
Rajput ex-Subadar-Major of our Native Army. The girl had a strain of Hill
blood in her, and, like the Hill women, was not a purdah nashin. Where Phil
met her, or how he heard of her, does not matter. She was a good girl and
handsome, and, in her way, very clever and shrewd; though, of course, a little
hard. It is to be remembered that Phil was living very comfortably, denying
himself no small luxury, never putting by an anna, very satisfied with himself
and his good intentions, was dropping all his English correspondents one by
one, and beginning more and more to look upon this land as his home. Some men
fall this way; and they are of no use afterwards. The climate where he was
stationed was good, and it really did not seem to him that there was anything
to go Home for.

He did what many planters have done before him--that is to say, he made up his
mind to marry a Hill girl and settle down. He was seven and twenty then, with
a long life before him, but no spirit to go through with it. So he married
Dunmaya by the forms of the English Church, and some fellow-planters said he
was a fool, and some said he was a wise man. Dunmaya was a thoroughly honest
girl, and, in spite of her reverence for an Englishman, had a reasonable
estimate of her husband's weaknesses. She managed him tenderly, and became, in
less than a year, a very passable imitation of an English lady in dress and
carriage. [It is curious to think that a Hill man, after a lifetime's
education, is a Hill man still; but a Hill woman can in six months master most
of the ways of her English sisters. There was a coolie woman once. But that is
another story.] Dunmaya dressed by preference in black and yellow, and looked
well.

Meantime the letter lay in Agnes's desk, and now and again she would think of
poor resolute hard-working Phil among the cobras and tigers of Darjiling,
toiling in the vain hope that she might come back to him. Her husband was
worth ten Phils, except that he had rheumatism of the heart. Three years after
he was married--and after he had tried Nice and Algeria for his complaint--he
went to Bombay, where he died, and set Agnes free. Being a devout woman, she
looked on his death and the place of it, as a direct interposition of
Providence, and when she had recovered from the shock, she took out and reread
Phil's letter with the "etc., etc.," and the big dashes, and the little
dashes, and kissed it several times. No one knew her in Bombay; she had her
husband's income, which was a large one, and Phil was close at hand. It was
wrong and improper, of course, but she decided, as heroines do in novels, to
find her old lover, to offer him her hand and her gold, and with him spend the
rest of her life in some spot far from unsympathetic souls. She sat for two
months, alone in Watson's Hotel, elaborating this decision, and the picture
was a pretty one. Then she set out in search of Phil Garron, Assistant on a
tea plantation with a more than usually unpronounceable name.
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

She found him. She spent a month over it,, for his plantation was not in the
Darjiling district at all, but nearer Kangra. Phil was very little altered,
and Dunmaya was very nice to her.

Now the particular sin and shame of the whole business is that Phil, who
really is not worth thinking of twice, was and is loved by Dunmaya, and more
than loved by Agnes, the whole of whose life he seems to have spoilt.

Worst of all, Dunmaya is making a decent man of him; and he will be ultimately
saved from perdition through her training.

Which is manifestly unfair.



FALSE DAWN.

Tonight God knows what thing shall tide,
  The Earth is racked and faint--
Expectant, sleepless, open-eyed;
And we, who from the Earth were made,
  Thrill with our Mother's pain.
             --In Durance.

No man will ever know the exact truth of this story; though women may
sometimes whisper it to one another after a dance, when they are putting up
their hair for the night and comparing lists of victims. A man, of course,
cannot assist at these functions. So the tale must be told from the outside--
in the dark--all wrong.

Never praise a sister to a sister, in the hope of your compliments reaching
the proper ears, and so preparing the way for you later on. Sisters are women
first, and sisters afterwards; and you will find that you do yourself harm.

Saumarez knew this when he made up his mind to propose to the elder Miss
Copleigh. Saumarez was a strange man, with few merits, so far as men could
see, though he was popular with women, and carried enough conceit to stock a
Viceroy's Council and leave a little over for the Commander-in-Chief's Staff.
He was a Civilian. Very many women took an interest in Saumarez, perhaps,
because his manner to them was offensive. If you hit a pony over the nose at
the outset of your acquaintance, he may not love you, but he will take a deep
interest in your movements ever afterwards. The elder Miss Copleigh was nice,
plump, winning and pretty. The younger was not so pretty, and, from men
disregarding the hint set forth above, her style was repellant and
unattractive. Both girls had, practically, the same figure, and there was a
strong likeness between them in look and voice; though no one could doubt for
an instant which was the nicer of the two.

Saumarez made up his mind, as soon as they came into the station from Behar,
to marry the elder one. At least, we all made sure that he would, which comes
to the same thing. She was two and twenty, and he was thirty-three, with pay
and allowances of nearly fourteen hundred rupees a month. So the match, as we
arranged it, was in every way a good one. Saumarez was his name, and summary
was his nature, as a man once said. Having drafted his Resolution, he formed a
Select Committee of One to sit upon it, and resolved to take his time. In our
unpleasant slang, the Copleigh girls "hunted in couples." That is to say, you
could do nothing with one without the other. They were very loving sisters;
but their mutual affection was sometimes inconvenient. Saumarez held the
balance-hair true between them, and none but himself could have said to which
side his heart inclined; though every one guessed. He rode with them a good
deal and danced with them, but he never succeeded in detaching them from each
other for any length of time.

Women said that the two girls kept together through deep mistrust, each
fearing that the other would steal a march on her. But that has nothing to do
with a man. Saumarez was silent for good or bad, and as

@business--likely attentive as he could be, having due regard to his work and
his polo. Beyond doubt both girls were fond of him.

As the hot weather drew nearer, and Saumarez made no sign, women said that you
could see their trouble in the eyes of the girls--that they were looking
strained, anxious, and irritable. Men are quite blind in these matters unless
they have more of the woman than the man in their composition, in which case
it does not matter what they say or think. I maintain it was the hot April
days that took the color out of the Copleigh girls' cheeks. They should have
been sent to the Hills early. No one--man or woman--feels an angel when the
hot weather is approaching. The younger sister grew more cynical--not to say
acid--in her ways; and the winningness of the elder wore thin. There was more
effort in it.

Now the Station wherein all these things happened was, though not a little
one, off the line of rail, and suffered through want of attention. There were
no gardens or bands or amusements worth speaking of, and it was nearly a day's
journey to come into Lahore for a dance. People were grateful for small things
to interest them.

About the beginning of May, and just before the final exodus of Hill-goers,
when the weather was very hot and there were not more than twenty people in
the Station, Saumarez gave a moonlight riding-picnic at an old tomb, six miles
away, near the bed of the river. It was a "Noah's Ark" picnic; and there was
to be the usual arrangement of quarter-mile intervals between each couple, on
account of the dust. Six couples came altogether, including chaperons.
Moonlight picnics are useful just at the very end of the season, before all
the girls go away to the Hills. They lead to understandings, and should be
encouraged by chaperones; especially those whose girls look sweetish in riding
habits. I knew a case once. But that is another story. That picnic was called
the "Great Pop Picnic," because every one knew Saumarez would propose then to
the eldest Miss Copleigh; and, beside his affair, there was another which
might possibly come to happiness.

The social atmosphere was heavily charged and wanted clearing.

We met at the parade-ground at ten: the night was fearfully hot.

The horses sweated even at walking-pace, but anything was better than sitting
still in our own dark houses. When we moved off under the full moon we were
four couples, one triplet, and Mr. Saumarez rode with the Copleigh girls, and
I loitered at the tail of the procession, wondering with whom Saumarez would
ride home. Every one was happy and contented; but we all felt that things were
going to happen. We rode slowly: and it was nearly midnight before we reached
the old tomb, facing the ruined tank, in the decayed gardens where we were
going to eat and drink. I was late in coming up; and before I went into the
garden, I saw that the horizon to the north carried a faint, dun-colored
feather. But no one would have thanked me for spoiling so well-managed an
entertainment as this picnic--and a dust-storm, more or less, does no great
harm.

We gathered by the tank. Some one had brought out a banjo--which is a most
sentimental instrument--and three or four of us sang.

You must not laugh at this. Our amusements in out-of-the-way Stations are very
few indeed. Then we talked in groups or together, lying under the trees, with
the sun-baked roses dropping their petals on our feet, until supper was ready.
It was a beautiful supper, as cold and as iced as you could wish; and we
stayed long over it.

I had felt that the air was growing hotter and hotter; but nobody seemed to
notice it until the moon went out and a burning hot wind began lashing the
orange-trees with a sound like the noise of the sea. Before we knew where we
were, the dust-storm was on us, and everything was roaring, whirling darkness.
The supper-table was blown bodily into the tank. We were afraid of staying
anywhere near the old tomb for fear it might be blown down. So we felt our way
to the orange-trees where the horses were picketed and waited for the storm to
blow over. Then the little light that was left vanished, and you could not see
your hand before your face. The air was heavy with dust and sand from the bed
of the river, that filled boots and pockets and drifted down necks and coated
eyebrows and moustaches. It was one of the worst dust-storms of the year.

We were all huddled together close to the trembling horses, with the thunder
clattering overhead, and the lightning spurting like water from a sluice, all
ways at once. There was no danger, of course, unless the horses broke loose. I
was standing with my head downward and my hands over my mouth, hearing the
trees thrashing each other. I could not see who was next me till the flashes
came.

Then I found that I was packed near Saumarez and the eldest Miss Copleigh,
with my own horse just in front of me. I recognized the eldest Miss Copleigh,
because she had a pagri round her helmet, and the younger had not. All the
electricity in the air had gone into my body and I was quivering and tingling
from head to foot--exactly as a corn shoots and tingles before rain. It was a
grand storm.

The wind seemed to be picking up the earth and pitching it to leeward in great
heaps; and the heat beat up from the ground like the heat of the Day of
Judgment.

The storm lulled slightly after the first half-hour, and I heard a despairing
little voice close to my ear, saying to itself, quietly and softly, as if some
lost soul were flying about with the wind: "O my God!" Then the younger Miss
Copleigh stumbled into my arms, saying: "Where is my horse? Get my horse. I
want to go home. I WANT to go home. Take me home."

I thought that the lightning and the black darkness had frightened her; so I
said there was no danger, but she must wait till the storm blew over. She
answered: "It is not THAT! It is not THAT! I want to go home! O take me away
from here!"

I said that she could not go till the light came; but I felt her brush past me
and go away. It was too dark to see where. Then the whole sky was split open
with one tremendous flash, as if the end of the world were coming, and all the
women shrieked.

Almost directly after this, I felt a man's hand on my shoulder and heard
Saumarez bellowing in my ear. Through the rattling of the trees and howling of
the wind, I did not catch his words at once, but at last I heard him say:
"I've proposed to the wrong one! What shall I do?" Saumarez had no occasion to
make this confidence to me. I was never a friend of his, nor am I now; but I
fancy neither of us were ourselves just then. He was shaking as he stood with
excitement, and I was feeling queer all over with the electricity.

I could not think of anything to say except:--"More fool you for proposing in
a dust-storm." But I did not see how that would improve the mistake.

Then he shouted: "Where's Edith--Edith Copleigh?" Edith was the youngest
sister. I answered out of my astonishment:--"What do you want with HER?" Would
you believe it, for the next two minutes, he and I were shouting at each other
like maniacs--he vowing that it was the youngest sister he had meant to
propose to all along, and I telling him till my throat was hoarse that he must
have made a mistake! I can't account for this except, again, by the fact that
we were neither of us ourselves. Everything seemed to me like a bad dream--
from the stamping of the horses in the darkness to Saumarez telling me the
story of his loving Edith Copleigh since the first. He was still clawing my
shoulder and begging me to tell him where Edith Copleigh was, when another
lull came and brought light with it, and we saw the dust-cloud forming on the
plain in front of us. So we knew the worst was over. The moon was low down,
and there was just the glimmer of the false dawn that comes about an hour
before the real one. But the light was very faint, and the dun cloud roared
like a bull. I wondered where Edith Copleigh had gone; and as I was wondering
I saw three things together: First Maud Copleigh's face come smiling out of
the darkness and move towards Saumarez, who was standing by me. I heard the
girl whisper, "George," and slide her arm through the arm that was not clawing
my shoulder, and I saw that look on her face which only comes once or twice in
a lifetime--when a woman is perfectly happy and the air is full of trumpets
and gorgeous-colored fire and the Earth turns into cloud because she loves and
is loved. At the same time, I saw Saumarez's face as he heard Maud Copleigh's
voice, and fifty yards away from the clump of orange-trees I saw a brown
holland habit getting upon a horse.

It must have been my state of over-excitement that made me so quick to meddle
with what did not concern me. Saumarez was moving off to the habit; but I
pushed him back and said:--"Stop here and explain. I'll fetch her back!" and I
ran out to get at my own horse. I had a perfectly unnecessary notion that
everything must be done decently and in order, and that Saumarez's first care
was to wipe the happy look out of Maud Copleigh's face. All the time I was
linking up the curb-chain I wondered how he would do it.

I cantered after Edith Copleigh, thinking to bring her back slowly on some
pretence or another. But she galloped away as soon as she saw me, and I was
forced to ride after her in earnest. She called back over her shoulder--"Go
away! I'm going home. Oh, go away!" two or three times; but my business was to
catch her first, and argue later. The ride just fitted in with the rest of the
evil dream. The ground was very bad, and now and again we rushed through the
whirling, choking "dust-devils" in the skirts of the flying storm. There was a
burning hot wind blowing that brought up a stench of stale brick-kilns with
it; and through the half light and through the dust-devils, across that
desolate plain, flickered the brown holland habit on the gray horse. She
headed for the Station at first. Then she wheeled round and set off for the
river through beds of burnt down jungle-grass, bad even to ride a pig over. In
cold blood I should never have dreamed of going over such a country at night,
but it seemed quite right and natural with the lightning crackling overhead,
and a reek like the smell of the Pit in my nostrils. I rode and shouted, and
she bent forward and lashed her horse, and the aftermath of the dust-storm
came up and caught us both, and drove us downwind like pieces of paper.

I don't know how far we rode; but the drumming of the horse-hoofs and the roar
of the wind and the race of the faint blood-red moon through the yellow mist
seemed to have gone on for years and years, and I was literally drenched with
sweat from my helmet to my gaiters when the gray stumbled, recovered himself,
and pulled up dead lame. My brute was used up altogether. Edith Copleigh was
in a sad state, plastered with dust, her helmet off, and crying bitterly. "Why
can't you let me alone?" she said. "I only wanted to get away and go home. Oh,
PLEASE let me go!"

"You have got to come back with me, Miss Copleigh. Saumarez has something to
say to you."

It was a foolish way of putting it; but I hardly knew Miss Copleigh; and,
though I was playing Providence at the cost of my horse, I could not tell her
in as many words what Saumarez had told me. I thought he could do that better
himself. All her pretence about being tired and wanting to go home broke down,
and she rocked herself to and fro in the saddle as she sobbed, and the hot
wind blew her black hair to leeward. I am not going to repeat what she said,
because she was utterly unstrung.

This, if you please, was the cynical Miss Copleigh. Here was I, almost an
utter stranger to her, trying to tell her that Saumarez loved her and she was
to come back to hear him say so! I believe I made myself understood, for she
gathered the gray together and made him hobble somehow, and we set off for the
tomb, while the storm went thundering down to Umballa and a few big drops of
warm rain fell. I found out that she had been standing close to Saumarez when
he proposed to her sister and had wanted to go home and cry in peace, as an
English girl should. She dabbled her eyes with her pocket-handkerchief as we
went along, and babbled to me out of sheer lightness of heart and hysteria.
That was perfectly unnatural; and yet, it seemed all right at the time and in
the place. All the world was only the two Copleigh girls, Saumarez and I,
ringed in with the lightning and the dark; and the guidance of this misguided
world seemed to lie in my hands.

When we returned to the tomb in the deep, dead stillness that followed the
storm, the dawn was just breaking and nobody had gone away. They were waiting
for our return. Saumarez most of all.

His face was white and drawn. As Miss Copleigh and I limped up, he came
forward to meet us, and, when he helped her down from her saddle, he kissed
her before all the picnic. It was like a scene in a theatre, and the likeness
was heightened by all the dust-white, ghostly-looking men and women under the
orange-trees, clapping their hands, as if they were watching a play--at
Saumarez's choice. I never knew anything so un-English in my life.

Lastly, Saumarez said we must all go home or the Station would come out to
look for us, and WOULD I be good enough to ride home with Maud Copleigh?
Nothing would give me greater pleasure, I said.

So, we formed up, six couples in all, and went back two by two; Saumarez
walking at the side of Edith Copleigh, who was riding his horse.

The air was cleared; and little by little, as the sun rose, I felt we were all
dropping back again into ordinary men and women and that the "Great Pop
Picnic" was a thing altogether apart and out of the world--never to happen
again. It had gone with the dust-storm and the tingle in the hot air.

I felt tired and limp, and a good deal ashamed of myself as I went in for a
bath and some sleep.

There is a woman's version of this story, but it will never be written . . . .
unless Maud Copleigh cares to try.


THE RESCUE OF PLUFFLES.

Thus, for a season, they fought it fair--
  She and his cousin May--
Tactful, talented, debonnaire,
  Decorous foes were they;
But never can battle of man compare
  With merciless feminine fray.
           --Two and One.

Mrs. Hauksbee was sometimes nice to her own sex. Here is a story to prove
this; and you can believe just as much as ever you please.

Pluffles was a subaltern in the "Unmentionables." He was callow, even for a
subaltern. He was callow all over--like a canary that had not finished
fledging itself. The worst of it was he had three times as much money as was
good for him; Pluffles' Papa being a rich man and Pluffles being the only son.
Pluffles' Mamma adored him. She was only a little less callow than Pluffles
and she believed everything he said.

Pluffles' weakness was not believing what people said. He preferred what he
called "trusting to his own judgment." He had as much judgment as he had seat
or hands; and this preference tumbled him into trouble once or twice. But the
biggest trouble Pluffles ever manufactured came about at Simla--some years
ago, when he was four-and-twenty.

He began by trusting to his own judgment, as usual, and the result was that,
after a time, he was bound hand and foot to Mrs. Reiver's 'rickshaw wheels.

There was nothing good about Mrs. Reiver, unless it was her dress.

She was bad from her hair--which started life on a Brittany's girl's head--to
her boot-heels, which were two and three-eighth inches high. She was not
honestly mischievous like Mrs. Hauksbee; she was wicked in a business-like
way.

There was never any scandal--she had not generous impulses enough for that.
She was the exception which proved the rule that Anglo-Indian ladies are in
every way as nice as their sisters at Home.

She spent her life in proving that rule.

Mrs. Hauksbee and she hated each other fervently. They heard far too much to
clash; but the things they said of each other were startling--not to say
original. Mrs. Hauksbee was honest--honest as her own front teeth--and, but
for her love of mischief, would have been a woman's woman. There was no
honesty about Mrs. Reiver; nothing but selfishness. And at the beginning of
the season, poor little Pluffles fell a prey to her. She laid herself out to
that end, and who was Pluffles, to resist? He went on trusting to his
judgment, and he got judged.

I have seen Hayes argue with a tough horse--I have seen a tonga-driver coerce
a stubborn pony--I have seen a riotous setter broken to gun by a hard keeper--
but the breaking-in of Pluffles of the "Unmentionables" was beyond all these.
He learned to fetch and carry like a dog, and to wait like one, too, for a
word from Mrs. Reiver. He learned to keep appointments which Mrs. Reiver had
no intention of keeping. He learned to take thankfully dances which Mrs.
Reiver had no intention of giving him. He learned to shiver for an hour and a
quarter on the windward side of Elysium while Mrs. Reiver was making up her
mind to come for a ride. He learned to hunt for a 'rickshaw, in a light dress-
suit under a pelting rain, and to walk by the side of that 'rickshaw when he
had found it. He learned what it was to be spoken to like a coolie and ordered
about like a cook. He learned all this and many other things besides. And he
paid for his schooling.

Perhaps, in some hazy way, he fancied that it was fine and impressive, that it
gave him a status among men, and was altogether the thing to do. It was
nobody's business to warn Pluffles that he was unwise. The pace that season
was too good to inquire; and meddling with another man's folly is always
thankless work.

Pluffles' Colonel should have ordered him back to his regiment when he heard
how things were going. But Pluffles had got himself engaged to a girl in
England the last time he went home; and if there was one thing more than
another which the Colonel detested, it was a married subaltern. He chuckled
when he heard of the education of Pluffles, and said it was "good training for
the boy." But it was not good training in the least. It led him into spending
money beyond his means, which were good: above that, the education spoilt an
average boy and made it a tenth-rate man of an objectionable kind. He wandered
into a bad set, and his little bill at Hamilton's was a thing to wonder at.

Then Mrs. Hauksbee rose to the occasion. She played her game alone, knowing
what people would say of her; and she played it for the sake of a girl she had
never seen. Pluffles' fiancee was to come out, under the chaperonage of an
aunt, in October, to be married to Pluffles.

At the beginning of August, Mrs. Hauksbee discovered that it was time to
interfere. A man who rides much knows exactly what a horse is going to do next
before he does it. In the same way, a woman of Mrs. Hauksbee's experience
knows accurately how a boy will behave under certain circumstances--notably
when he is infatuated with one of Mrs. Reiver's stamp. She said that, sooner
or later, little Pluffles would break off that engagement for nothing at all--
simply to gratify Mrs. Reiver, who, in return, would keep him at her feet and
in her service just so long as she found it worth her while.

She said she knew the signs of these things. If she did not, no one else
could.

Then she went forth to capture Pluffles under the guns of the enemy; just as
Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil carried away Bremmil under Mrs. Hauksbee's eyes.

This particular engagement lasted seven weeks--we called it the Seven Weeks'
War--and was fought out inch by inch on both sides. A detailed account would
fill a book, and would be incomplete then.

Any one who knows about these things can fit in the details for himself. It
was a superb fight--there will never be another like it as long as Jakko
stands--and Pluffles was the prize of victory.

People said shameful things about Mrs. Hauksbee. They did not know what she
was playing for. Mrs. Reiver fought, partly because Pluffles was useful to
her, but mainly because she hated Mrs. Hauksbee, and the matter was a trial of
strength between them. No one knows what Pluffles thought. He had not many
ideas at the best of times, and the few he possessed made him conceited. Mrs.
Hauksbee said:--"The boy must be caught; and the only way of catching him is
by treating him well."

So she treated him as a man of the world and of experience so long as the
issue was doubtful. Little by little, Pluffles fell away from his old
allegiance and came over to the enemy, by whom he was made much of. He was
never sent on out-post duty after 'rickshaws any more, nor was he given dances
which never came off, nor were the drains on his purse continued. Mrs.
Hauksbee held him on the snaffle; and after his treatment at Mrs. Reiver's
hands, he appreciated the change.

Mrs. Reiver had broken him of talking about himself, and made him talk about
her own merits. Mrs. Hauksbee acted otherwise, and won his confidence, till he
mentioned his engagement to the girl at Home, speaking of it in a high and
mighty way as a "piece of boyish folly." This was when he was taking tea with
her one afternoon, and discoursing in what he considered a gay and fascinating
style.

Mrs. Hauksbee had seen an earlier generation of his stamp bud and blossom, and
decay into fat Captains and tubby Majors.

At a moderate estimate there were about three and twenty sides to that lady's
character. Some men say more. She began to talk to Pluffles after the manner
of a mother, and as if there had been three hundred years, instead of fifteen,
between them. She spoke with a sort of throaty quaver in her voice which had a
soothing effect, though what she said was anything but soothing. She pointed
out the exceeding folly, not to say meanness, of Pluffles' conduct, and the
smallness of his views. Then he stammered something about "trusting to his own
judgment as a man of the world;" and this paved the way for what she wanted to
say next. It would have withered up Pluffles had it come from any other woman;
but in the soft cooing style in which Mrs. Hauksbee put it, it only made him
feel limp and repentant--as if he had been in some superior kind of church.
Little by little, very softly and pleasantly, she began taking the conceit out
of Pluffles, as you take the ribs out of an umbrella before re-covering it.
She told him what she thought of him and his judgment and his knowledge of the
world; and how his performances had made him ridiculous to other people; and
how it was his intention to make love to herself if she gave him the chance.
Then she said that marriage would be the making of him; and drew a pretty
little picture--all rose and opal--of the Mrs. Pluffles of the future going
through life relying on the "judgment" and "knowledge of the world" of a
husband who had nothing to reproach himself with. How she reconciled these two
statements she alone knew. But they did not strike Pluffles as conflicting.

Hers was a perfect little homily--much better than any clergyman could have
given--and it ended with touching allusions to Pluffles' Mamma and Papa, and
the wisdom of taking his bride Home.

Then she sent Pluffles out for a walk, to think over what she had said.
Pluffles left, blowing his nose very hard and holding himself very straight.
Mrs. Hauksbee laughed.

What Pluffles had intended to do in the matter of the engagement only Mrs.
Reiver knew, and she kept her own counsel to her death. She would have liked
it spoiled as a compliment, I fancy.

Pluffles enjoyed many talks with Mrs. Hauksbee during the next few days. They
were all to the same end, and they helped Pluffles in the path of Virtue.

Mrs. Hauksbee wanted to keep him under her wing to the last.

Therefore she discountenanced his going down to Bombay to get married.
"Goodness only knows what might happen by the way!" she said. "Pluffles is
cursed with the curse of Reuben, and India is no fit place for him!"

In the end, the fiancee arrived with her aunt; and Pluffles, having reduced
his affairs to some sort of order--here again Mrs. Hauksbee helped him--was
married.

Mrs. Hauksbee gave a sigh of relief when both the "I wills" had been said, and
went her way.

Pluffles took her advice about going Home. He left the Service, and is now
raising speckled cattle inside green painted fences somewhere at Home. I
believe he does this very judiciously. He would have come to extreme grief out
here.

For these reasons if any one says anything more than usually nasty about Mrs.
Hauksbee, tell him the story of the Rescue of Pluffles.



CUPID'S ARROWS.

Pit where the buffalo cooled his hide,
By the hot sun emptied, and blistered and dried;
Log in the reh-grass, hidden and alone;
Bund where the earth-rat's mounds are strown;
Cave in the bank where the sly stream steals;
Aloe that stabs at the belly and heels,
Jump if you dare on a steed untried--
Safer it is to go wide--go wide!
Hark, from in front where the best men ride:--
"Pull to the off, boys! Wide! Go wide!"
             --The Peora Hunt.

Once upon a time there lived at Simla a very pretty girl, the daughter of a
poor but honest District and Sessions Judge. She was a good girl, but could
not help knowing her power and using it.

Her Mamma was very anxious about her daughter's future, as all good Mammas
should be.

When a man is a Commissioner and a bachelor and has the right of wearing open-
work jam-tart jewels in gold and enamel on his clothes, and of going through a
door before every one except a Member of Council, a Lieutenant-Governor, or a
Viceroy, he is worth marrying. At least, that is what ladies say. There was a
Commissioner in Simla, in those days, who was, and wore, and did, all I have
said. He was a plain man--an ugly man--the ugliest man in Asia, with two
exceptions. His was a face to dream about and try to carve on a pipe-head
afterwards. His name was Saggott--Barr-Saggott--Anthony Barr-Saggott and six
letters to follow.

Departmentally, he was one of the best men the Government of India owned.
Socially, he was like a blandishing gorilla.

When he turned his attentions to Miss Beighton, I believe that Mrs.

Beighton wept with delight at the reward Providence had sent her in her old
age.

Mr. Beighton held his tongue. He was an easy-going man.

Now a Commissioner is very rich. His pay is beyond the dreams of avarice--is
so enormous that he can afford to save and scrape in a way that would almost
discredit a Member of Council. Most Commissioners are mean; but Barr-Saggott
was an exception. He entertained royally; he horsed himself well; he gave
dances; he was a power in the land; and he behaved as such.

Consider that everything I am writing of took place in an almost pre-historic
era in the history of British India. Some folk may remember the years before
lawn-tennis was born when we all played croquet. There were seasons before
that, if you will believe me, when even croquet had not been invented, and
archery--which was revived in England in 1844--was as great a pest as lawn-
tennis is now. People talked learnedly about "holding" and "loosing,"
"steles," "reflexed bows," "56-pound bows," "backed" or "self-yew bows," as we
talk about "rallies," "volleys," "smashes," "returns," and "16-ounce rackets."

Miss Beighton shot divinely over ladies' distance--60 yards, that is--and was
acknowledged the best lady archer in Simla. Men called her "Diana of Tara-
Devi."

Barr-Saggott paid her great attention; and, as I have said, the heart of her
mother was uplifted in consequence. Kitty Beighton took matters more calmly.
It was pleasant to be singled out by a Commissioner with letters after his
name, and to fill the hearts of other girls with bad feelings. But there was
no denying the fact that Barr-Saggott was phenomenally ugly; and all his
attempts to adorn himself only made him more grotesque. He was not christened
"The Langur"--which means gray ape--for nothing. It was pleasant, Kitty
thought, to have him at her feet, but it was better to escape from him and
ride with the graceless Cubbon--the man in a Dragoon Regiment at Umballa--the
boy with a handsome face, and no prospects. Kitty liked Cubbon more than a
little. He never pretended for a moment the he was anything less than head
over heels in love with her; for he was an honest boy. So Kitty fled, now and
again, from the stately wooings of Barr-Saggott to the company of young
Cubbon, and was scolded by her Mamma in consequence. "But, Mother," she said,
"Mr. Saggott is such--such a--is so FEARFULLY ugly, you know!"

"My dear," said Mrs. Beighton, piously, "we cannot be other than an all-ruling
Providence has made us. Besides, you will take precedence of your own Mother,
you know! Think of that and be reasonable."

Then Kitty put up her little chin and said irreverent things about precedence,
and Commissioners, and matrimony. Mr. Beighton rubbed the top of his head; for
he was an easy-going man.

Late in the season, when he judged that the time was ripe, Barr-Saggott
developed a plan which did great credit to his administrative powers. He
arranged an archery tournament for ladies, with a most sumptuous diamond-
studded bracelet as prize.

He drew up his terms skilfully, and every one saw that the bracelet was a gift
to Miss Beighton; the acceptance carrying with it the hand and the heart of
Commissioner Barr-Saggott. The terms were a St. Leonard's Round--thirty-six
shots at sixty yards--under the rules of the Simla Toxophilite Society.

All Simla was invited. There were beautifully arranged tea-tables under the
deodars at Annandale, where the Grand Stand is now; and, alone in its glory,
winking in the sun, sat the diamond bracelet in a blue velvet case. Miss
Beighton was anxious--almost too anxious to compete. On the appointed
afternoon, all Simla rode down to Annandale to witness the Judgment of Paris
turned upside down.

Kitty rode with young Cubbon, and it was easy to see that the boy was troubled
in his mind. He must be held innocent of everything that followed. Kitty was
pale and nervous, and looked long at the bracelet. Barr-Saggott was gorgeously
dressed, even more nervous than Kitty, and more hideous than ever.

Mrs. Beighton smiled condescendingly, as befitted the mother of a potential
Commissioneress, and the shooting began; all the world standing in a
semicircle as the ladies came out one after the other.

Nothing is so tedious as an archery competition. They shot, and they shot, and
they kept on shooting, till the sun left the valley, and little breezes got up
in the deodars, and people waited for Miss Beighton to shoot and win. Cubbon
was at one horn of the semicircle round the shooters, and Barr-Saggott at the
other. Miss Beighton was last on the list. The scoring had been weak, and the
bracelet, PLUS Commissioner Barr-Saggott, was hers to a certainty.

The Commissioner strung her bow with his own sacred hands. She stepped
forward, looked at the bracelet, and her first arrow went true to a hair--full
into the heart of the "gold"--counting nine points.

Young Cubbon on the left turned white, and his Devil prompted Barr-Saggott to
smile. Now horses used to shy when Barr-Saggott smiled.

Kitty saw that smile. She looked to her left-front, gave an almost
imperceptible nod to Cubbon, and went on shooting.

I wish I could describe the scene that followed. It was out of the ordinary
and most improper. Miss Kitty fitted her arrows with immense deliberation, so
that every one might see what she was doing. She was a perfect shot; and her
46-pound bow suited her to a nicety. She pinned the wooden legs of the target
with great care four successive times. She pinned the wooden top of the target
once, and all the ladies looked at each other. Then she began some fancy
shooting at the white, which, if you hit it, counts exactly one point. She put
five arrows into the white. It was wonderful archery; but, seeing that her
business was to make "golds" and win the bracelet, Barr-Saggott turned a
delicate green like young water-grass. Next, she shot over the target twice,
then wide to the left twice--always with the same deliberation--while a chilly
hush fell over the company, and Mrs. Beighton took out her handkerchief. Then
Kitty shot at the ground in front of the target, and split several arrows.
Then she made a red--or seven points--just to show what she could do if she
liked, and finished up her amazing performance with some more fancy shooting
at the target-supports. Here is her score as it was picked off:--

Gold. Red. Blue. Black. White. Total Hits.  Total Score Miss Beighton 
1      1    0     0      5        7                  21

Barr-Saggott looked as if the last few arrowheads had been driven into his
legs instead of the target's, and the deep stillness was broken by a little
snubby, mottled, half-grown girl saying in a shrill voice of triumph: "Then
I'VE won!"

Mrs. Beighton did her best to bear up; but she wept in the presence of the
people. No training could help her through such a disappointment. Kitty
unstrung her bow with a vicious jerk, and went back to her place, while Barr-
Saggott was trying to pretend that he enjoyed snapping the bracelet on the
snubby girl's raw, red wrist. It was an awkward scene--most awkward. Every one
tried to depart in a body and leave Kitty to the mercy of her Mamma.

But Cubbon took her away instead, and--the rest isn't worth printing.



HIS CHANCE IN LIFE.

Then a pile of heads be laid--
  Thirty thousand heaped on high--
All to please the Kafir maid,
  Where the Oxus ripples by.

  Grimly spake Atulla Khan:--
  "Love hath made this thing a Man."
          --Oatta's Story.

If you go straight away from Levees and Government House Lists, past Trades'
Balls--far beyond everything and everybody you ever knew in your respectable
life--you cross, in time, the Border line where the last drop of White blood
ends and the full tide of Black sets in. It would be easier to talk to a new-
made Duchess on the spur of the moment than to the Borderline folk without
violating some of their conventions or hurting their feelings. The Black and
the White mix very quaintly in their ways. Sometimes the White shows in spurts
of fierce, childish pride--which is Pride of Race run crooked--and sometimes
the Black in still fiercer abasement and humility, half heathenish customs and
strange, unaccountable impulses to crime. One of these days, this people--
understand they are far lower than the class whence Derozio, the man who
imitated Byron, sprung--will turn out a writer or a poet; and then we shall
know how they live and what they feel. In the meantime, any stories about them
cannot be absolutely correct in fact or inference.

Miss Vezzis came from across the Borderline to look after some children who
belonged to a lady until a regularly ordained nurse could come out. The lady
said Miss Vezzis was a bad, dirty nurse and inattentive. It never struck her
that Miss Vezzis had her own life to lead and her own affairs to worry over,
and that these affairs were the most important things in the world to Miss
Vezzis.

Very few mistresses admit this sort of reasoning. Miss Vezzis was as black as
a boot, and to our standard of taste, hideously ugly.

She wore cotton-print gowns and bulged shoes; and when she lost her temper
with the children, she abused them in the language of the Borderline--which is
part English, part Portuguese, and part Native. She was not attractive; but
she had her pride, and she preferred being called "Miss Vezzis."

Every Sunday she dressed herself wonderfully and went to see her Mamma, who
lived, for the most part, on an old cane chair in a greasy tussur-silk
dressing-gown and a big rabbit-warren of a house full of Vezzises, Pereiras,
Ribieras, Lisboas and Gansalveses, and a floating population of loafers;
besides fragments of the day's bazar, garlic, stale incense, clothes thrown on
the floor, petticoats hung on strings for screens, old bottles, pewter
crucifixes, dried immortelles, pariah puppies, plaster images of the Virgin,
and hats without crowns. Miss Vezzis drew twenty rupees a month for acting as
nurse, and she squabbled weekly with her Mamma as to the percentage to be
given towards housekeeping.

When the quarrel was over, Michele D'Cruze used to shamble across the low mud
wall of the compound and make love to Miss Vezzis after the fashion of the
Borderline, which is hedged about with much ceremony. Michele was a poor,
sickly weed and very black; but he had his pride. He would not be seen smoking
a huqa for anything; and he looked down on natives as only a man with seven-
eighths native blood in his veins can. The Vezzis Family had their pride too.
They traced their descent from a mythical plate-layer who had worked on the
Sone Bridge when railways were new in India, and they valued their English
origin. Michele was a Telegraph Signaller on Rs. 35 a month. The fact that he
was in Government employ made Mrs. Vezzis lenient to the shortcomings of his
ancestors.

There was a compromising legend--Dom Anna the tailor brought it from Poonani--
that a black Jew of Cochin had once married into the D'Cruze family; while it
was an open secret that an uncle of Mrs. D'Cruze was at that very time doing
menial work, connected with cooking, for a Club in Southern India! He sent Mrs
D'Cruze seven rupees eight annas a month; but she felt the disgrace to the
family very keenly all the same.

However, in the course of a few Sundays, Mrs. Vezzis brought herself to
overlook these blemishes and gave her consent to the marriage of her daughter
with Michele, on condition that Michele should have at least fifty rupees a
month to start married life upon. This wonderful prudence must have been a
lingering touch of the mythical plate-layer's Yorkshire blood; for across the
Borderline people take a pride in marrying when they please--not when they
can.

Having regard to his departmental prospects, Miss Vezzis might as well have
asked Michele to go away and come back with the Moon in his pocket. But
Michele was deeply in love with Miss Vezzis, and that helped him to endure. He
accompanied Miss Vezzis to Mass one Sunday, and after Mass, walking home
through the hot stale dust with her hand in his, he swore by several Saints,
whose names would not interest you, never to forget Miss Vezzis; and she swore
by her Honor and the Saints--the oath runs rather curiously; "In nomine
Sanctissimae--" (whatever the name of the she-Saint is) and so forth, ending
with a kiss on the forehead, a kiss on the left cheek, and a kiss on the
mouth--never to forget Michele.

Next week Michele was transferred, and Miss Vezzis dropped tears upon the
window-sash of the "Intermediate" compartment as he left the Station.

If you look at the telegraph-map of India you will see a long line skirting
the coast from Backergunge to Madras. Michele was ordered to Tibasu, a little
Sub-office one-third down this line, to send messages on from Berhampur to
Chicacola, and to think of Miss Vezzis and his chances of getting fifty rupees
a month out of office hours. He had the noise of the Bay of Bengal and a
Bengali Babu for company; nothing more. He sent foolish letters, with crosses
tucked inside the flaps of the envelopes, to Miss Vezzis.

When he had been at Tibasu for nearly three weeks his chance came.

Never forget that unless the outward and visible signs of Our Authority are
always before a native he is as incapable as a child of understanding what
authority means, or where is the danger of disobeying it. Tibasu was a
forgotten little place with a few Orissa Mohamedans in it. These, hearing
nothing of the Collector-Sahib for some time, and heartily despising the Hindu
Sub-Judge, arranged to start a little Mohurrum riot of their own. But the
Hindus turned out and broke their heads; when, finding lawlessness pleasant,
Hindus and Mahomedans together raised an aimless sort of Donnybrook just to
see how far they could go. They looted each other's shops, and paid off
private grudges in the regular way. It was a nasty little riot, but not worth
putting in the newspapers.

Michele was working in his office when he heard the sound that a man never
forgets all his life--the "ah-yah" of an angry crowd.

[When that sound drops about three tones, and changes to a thick, droning ut,
the man who hears it had better go away if he is alone.] The Native Police
Inspector ran in and told Michele that the town was in an uproar and coming to
wreck the Telegraph Office.

The Babu put on his cap and quietly dropped out of the window; while the
Police Inspector, afraid, but obeying the old race-instinct which recognizes a
drop of White blood as far as it can be diluted, said:--"What orders does the
Sahib give?"

The "Sahib" decided Michele. Though horribly frightened, he felt that, for the
hour, he, the man with the Cochin Jew and the menial uncle in his pedigree,
was the only representative of English authority in the place. Then he thought
of Miss Vezzis and the fifty rupees, and took the situation on himself. There
were seven native policemen in Tibasu, and four crazy smooth-bore muskets
among them. All the men were gray with fear, but not beyond leading. Michele
dropped the key of the telegraph instrument, and went out, at the head of his
army, to meet the mob. As the shouting crew came round a corner of the road,
he dropped and fired; the men behind him loosing instinctively at the same
time.

The whole crowd--curs to the backbone--yelled and ran; leaving one man dead,
and another dying in the road. Michele was sweating with fear, but he kept his
weakness under, and went down into the town, past the house where the Sub-
Judge had barricaded himself. The streets were empty. Tibasu was more
frightened than Michele, for the mob had been taken at the right time.

Michele returned to the Telegraph-Office, and sent a message to Chicacola
asking for help. Before an answer came, he received a deputation of the elders
of Tibasu, telling him that the Sub-Judge said his actions generally were
"unconstitional," and trying to bully him. But the heart of Michele D'Cruze
was big and white in his breast, because of his love for Miss Vezzis, the
nurse-girl, and because he had tasted for the first time Responsibility and
Success. Those two make an intoxicating drink, and have ruined more men than
ever has Whiskey. Michele answered that the Sub-Judge might say what he
pleased, but, until the Assistant Collector came, the Telegraph Signaller was
the Government of India in Tibasu, and the elders of the town would be held
accountable for further rioting. Then they bowed their heads and said: "Show
mercy!" or words to that effect, and went back in great fear; each accusing
the other of having begun the rioting.

Early in the dawn, after a night's patrol with his seven policemen, Michele
went down the road, musket in hand, to meet the Assistant Collector, who had
ridden in to quell Tibasu. But, in the presence of this young Englishman,
Michele felt himself slipping back more and more into the native, and the tale
of the Tibasu Riots ended, with the strain on the teller, in an hysterical
outburst of tears, bred by sorrow that he had killed a man, shame that he
could not feel as uplifted as he had felt through the night, and childish
anger that his tongue could not do justice to his great deeds. It was the
White drop in Michele's veins dying out, though he did not know it.

But the Englishman understood; and, after he had schooled those men of Tibasu,
and had conferred with the Sub-Judge till that excellent official turned
green, he found time to draught an official letter describing the conduct of
Michele. Which letter filtered through the Proper Channels, and ended in the
transfer of Michele up-country once more, on the Imperial salary of sixty-six
rupees a month.

So he and Miss Vezzis were married with great state and ancientry; and now
there are several little D'Cruzes sprawling about the verandahs of the Central
Telegraph Office.

But, if the whole revenue of the Department he serves were to be his reward
Michele could never, never repeat what he did at Tibasu for the sake of Miss
Vezzis the nurse-girl.

Which proves that, when a man does good work out of all proportion to his pay,
in seven cases out of nine there is a woman at the back of the virtue.

The two exceptions must have suffered from sunstroke.



WATCHES OF THE NIGHT.

What is in the Brahmin's books that is in the Brahmin's heart.
Neither you nor I knew there was so much evil in the world.
        --Hindu Proverb.

This began in a practical joke; but it has gone far enough now, and is getting
serious.

Platte, the Subaltern, being poor, had a Waterbury watch and a plain leather
guard.

The Colonel had a Waterbury watch also, and for guard, the lip-strap of a
curb-chain. Lip-straps make the best watch guards.

They are strong and short. Between a lip-strap and an ordinary leather guard
there is no great difference; between one Waterbury watch and another there is
none at all. Every one in the station knew the Colonel's lip-strap. He was not
a horsey man, but he liked people to believe he had been one once; and he wove
fantastic stories of the hunting-bridle to which this particular lip-strap had
belonged. Otherwise he was painfully religious.

Platte and the Colonel were dressing at the Club--both late for their
engagements, and both in a hurry. That was Kismet. The two watches were on a
shelf below the looking-glass--guards hanging down. That was carelessness.
Platte changed first, snatched a watch, looked in the glass, settled his tie,
and ran. Forty seconds later, the Colonel did exactly the same thing; each man
taking the other's watch.

You may have noticed that many religious people are deeply suspicious. They
seem--for purely religious purposes, of course--to know more about iniquity
than the Unregenerate. Perhaps they were specially bad before they became
converted! At any rate, in the imputation of things evil, and in putting the
worst construction on things innocent, a certain type of good people may be
trusted to surpass all others. The Colonel and his Wife were of that type. But
the Colonel's Wife was the worst. She manufactured the Station scandal, and--
TALKED TO HER AYAH! Nothing more need be said. The Colonel's Wife broke up the
Laplaces's home. The Colonel's Wife stopped the Ferris-Haughtrey engagement.
The Colonel's Wife induced young Buxton to keep his wife down in the Plains
through the first year of the marriage. Whereby little Mrs.

Buxton died, and the baby with her. These things will be remembered against
the Colonel's Wife so long as there is a regiment in the country.

But to come back to the Colonel and Platte. They went their several ways from
the dressing-room. The Colonel dined with two Chaplains, while Platte went to
a bachelor-party, and whist to follow.

Mark how things happen! If Platte's sais had put the new saddle-pad on the
mare, the butts of the terrets would not have worked through the worn leather,
and the old pad into the mare's withers, when she was coming home at two
o'clock in the morning. She would not have reared, bolted, fallen into a
ditch, upset the cart, and sent Platte flying over an aloe-hedge on to Mrs.
Larkyn's well-kept lawn; and this tale would never have been written. But the
mare did all these things, and while Platte was rolling over and over on the
turf, like a shot rabbit, the watch and guard flew from his waistcoat--as an
Infantry Major's sword hops out of the scabbard when they are firing a feu de
joie--and rolled and rolled in the moonlight, till it stopped under a window.

Platte stuffed his handkerchief under the pad, put the cart straight, and went
home.

Mark again how Kismet works! This would not happen once in a hundred years.
Towards the end of his dinner with the two Chaplains, the Colonel let out his
waistcoat and leaned over the table to look at some Mission Reports. The bar
of the watch-guard worked through the buttonhole, and the watch--Platte's
watch--slid quietly on to the carpet. Where the bearer found it next morning
and kept it.

Then the Colonel went home to the wife of his bosom; but the driver of the
carriage was drunk and lost his way. So the Colonel returned at an unseemly
hour and his excuses were not accepted. If the Colonel's Wife had been an
ordinary "vessel of wrath appointed for destruction," she would have known
that when a man stays away on purpose, his excuse is always sound and
original. The very baldness of the Colonel's explanation proved its truth.

See once more the workings of Kismet! The Colonel's watch which came with
Platte hurriedly on to Mrs. Larkyn's lawn, chose to stop just under Mrs.
Larkyn's window, where she saw it early in the morning, recognized it, and
picked it up. She had heard the crash of Platte's cart at two o'clock that
morning, and his voice calling the mare names. She knew Platte and liked him.
That day she showed him the watch and heard his story. He put his head on one
side, winked and said:--"How disgusting! Shocking old man! with his religious
training, too! I should send the watch to the Colonel's Wife and ask for
explanations."

Mrs. Larkyn thought for a minute of the Laplaces--whom she had known when
Laplace and his wife believed in each other--and answered:--"I will send it. I
think it will do her good. But remember, we must NEVER tell her the truth."

Platte guessed that his own watch was in the Colonel's possession, and thought
that the return of the lip-strapped Waterbury with a soothing note from Mrs.
Larkyn, would merely create a small trouble for a few minutes. Mrs. Larkyn
knew better. She knew that any poison dropped would find good holding-ground
in the heart of the Colonel's Wife.

The packet, and a note containing a few remarks on the Colonel's calling-
hours, were sent over to the Colonel's Wife, who wept in her own room and took
counsel with herself.

If there was one woman under Heaven whom the Colonel's Wife hated with holy
fervor, it was Mrs. Larkyn. Mrs. Larkyn was a frivolous lady, and called the
Colonel's Wife "old cat." The Colonel's Wife said that somebody in Revelations
was remarkably like Mrs. Larkyn.

She mentioned other Scripture people as well. From the Old Testament. [But the
Colonel's Wife was the only person who cared or dared to say anything against
Mrs. Larkyn. Every one else accepted her as an amusing, honest little body.]
Wherefore, to believe that her husband had been shedding watches under that
"Thing's" window at ungodly hours, coupled with the fact of his late arrival
on the previous night, was . . . . .

At this point she rose up and sought her husband. He denied everything except
the ownership of the watch. She besought him, for his Soul's sake, to speak
the truth. He denied afresh, with two bad words. Then a stony silence held the
Colonel's Wife, while a man could draw his breath five times.

The speech that followed is no affair of mine or yours. It was made up of
wifely and womanly jealousy; knowledge of old age and sunken cheeks; deep
mistrust born of the text that says even little babies' hearts are as bad as
they make them; rancorous hatred of Mrs. Larkyn, and the tenets of the creed
of the Colonel's Wife's upbringing.

Over and above all, was the damning lip-strapped Waterbury, ticking away in
the palm of her shaking, withered hand. At that hour, I think, the Colonel's
Wife realized a little of the restless suspicions she had injected into old
Laplace's mind, a little of poor Miss Haughtrey's misery, and some of the
canker that ate into Buxton's heart as he watched his wife dying before his
eyes. The Colonel stammered and tried to explain. Then he remembered that his
watch had disappeared; and the mystery grew greater. The Colonel's Wife talked
and prayed by turns till she was tired, and went away to devise means for
"chastening the stubborn heart of her husband." Which translated, means, in
our slang, "tail-twisting."

You see, being deeply impressed with the doctrine of Original Sin, she could
not believe in the face of appearances. She knew too much, and jumped to the
wildest conclusions.

But it was good for her. It spoilt her life, as she had spoilt the life of the
Laplaces. She had lost her faith in the Colonel, and--here the creed suspicion
came in--he might, she argued, have erred many times, before a merciful
Providence, at the hands of so unworthy an instrument as Mrs. Larkyn, had
established his guilt.

He was a bad, wicked, gray-haired profligate. This may sound too sudden a
revulsion for a long-wedded wife; but it is a venerable fact that, if a man or
woman makes a practice of, and takes a delight in, believing and spreading
evil of people indifferent to him or her, he or she will end in believing evil
of folk very near and dear. You may think, also, that the mere incident of the
watch was too small and trivial to raise this misunderstanding. It is another
aged fact that, in life as well as racing, all the worst accidents happen at
little ditches and cut-down fences. In the same way, you sometimes see a woman
who would have made a Joan of Arc in another century and climate, threshing
herself to pieces over all the mean worry of housekeeping. But that is another
story.

Her belief only made the Colonel's Wife more wretched, because it insisted so
strongly on the villainy of men. Remembering what she had done, it was
pleasant to watch her unhappiness, and the penny-farthing attempts she made to
hide it from the Station. But the Station knew and laughed heartlessly; for
they had heard the story of the watch, with much dramatic gesture, from Mrs.
Larkyn's lips.

Once or twice Platte said to Mrs. Larkyn, seeing that the Colonel had not
cleared himself:--"This thing has gone far enough. I move we tell the
Colonel's Wife how it happened." Mrs. Larkyn shut her lips and shook her head,
and vowed that the Colonel's Wife must bear her punishment as best she could.
Now Mrs. Larkyn was a frivolous woman, in whom none would have suspected deep
hate. So Platte took no action, and came to believe gradually, from the
Colonel's silence, that the Colonel must have "run off the line" somewhere
that night, and, therefore, preferred to stand sentence on the lesser count of
rambling into other people's compounds out of calling hours. Platte forgot
about the watch business after a while, and moved down-country with his
regiment. Mrs. Larkyn went home when her husband's tour of Indian service
expired. She never forgot.

But Platte was quite right when he said that the joke had gone too far. The
mistrust and the tragedy of it--which we outsiders cannot see and do not
believe in--are killing the Colonel's Wife, and are making the Colonel
wretched. If either of them read this story, they can depend upon its being a
fairly true account of the case, and can "kiss and make friends."

Shakespeare alludes to the pleasure of watching an Engineer being shelled by
his own Battery. Now this shows that poets should not write about what they do
not understand. Any one could have told him that Sappers and Gunners are
perfectly different branches of the Service. But, if you correct the sentence,
and substitute Gunner for Sapper, the moral comes just the same.



THE OTHER MAN.

When the earth was sick and the skies were gray,
  And the woods were rotted with rain,
The Dead Man rode through the autumn day
  To visit his love again.
          --Old Ballad.

Far back in the "seventies," before they had built any Public Offices at
Simla, and the broad road round Jakko lived in a pigeon-hole in the P. W. D.
hovels, her parents made Miss Gaurey marry Colonel Schreiderling. He could not
have been MUCH more than thirty-five years her senior; and, as he lived on two
hundred rupees a month and had money of his own, he was well off. He belonged
to good people, and suffered in the cold weather from lung complaints. In the
hot weather he dangled on the brink of heat-apoplexy; but it never quite
killed him.

Understand, I do not blame Schreiderling. He was a good husband according to
his lights, and his temper only failed him when he was being nursed. Which was
some seventeen days in each month. He was almost generous to his wife about
money matters, and that, for him, was a concession. Still Mrs. Schreiderling
was not happy. They married her when she was this side of twenty and had given
all her poor little heart to another man. I have forgotten his name, but we
will call him the Other Man. He had no money and no prospects.

He was not even good-looking; and I think he was in the Commissariat or
Transport. But, in spite of all these things, she loved him very madly; and
there was some sort of an engagement between the two when Schreiderling
appeared and told Mrs. Gaurey that he wished to marry her daughter. Then the
other engagement was broken off--washed away by Mrs. Gaurey's tears, for that
lady governed her house by weeping over disobedience to her authority and the
lack of reverence she received in her old age. The daughter did not take after
her mother. She never cried. Not even at the wedding.

The Other Man bore his loss quietly, and was transferred to as bad a station
as he could find. Perhaps the climate consoled him. He suffered from
intermittent fever, and that may have distracted him from his other trouble.
He was weak about the heart also. Both ways. One of the valves was affected,
and the fever made it worse.

This showed itself later on.

Then many months passed, and Mrs. Schreiderling took to being ill.

She did not pine away like people in story books, but she seemed to pick up
every form of illness that went about a station, from simple fever upwards.
She was never more than ordinarily pretty at the best of times; and the
illness made her ugly. Schreiderling said so. He prided himself on speaking
his mind.

When she ceased being pretty, he left her to her own devices, and went back to
the lairs of his bachelordom. She used to trot up and down Simla Mall in a
forlorn sort of way, with a gray Terai hat well on the back of her head, and a
shocking bad saddle under her.

Schreiderling's generosity stopped at the horse. He said that any saddle would
do for a woman as nervous as Mrs. Schreiderling. She never was asked to dance,
because she did not dance well; and she was so dull and uninteresting, that
her box very seldom had any cards in it. Schreiderling said that if he had
known that she was going to be such a scare-crow after her marriage, he would
never have married her. He always prided himself on speaking his mind, did
Schreiderling!

He left her at Simla one August, and went down to his regiment.

Then she revived a little, but she never recovered her looks. I found out at
the Club that the Other Man is coming up sick--very sick--on an off chance of
recovery. The fever and the heart-valves had nearly killed him. She knew that,
too, and she knew--what I had no interest in knowing--when he was coming up. I
suppose he wrote to tell her. They had not seen each other since a month
before the wedding. And here comes the unpleasant part of the story.

A late call kept me down at the Dovedell Hotel till dusk one evening. Mrs.
Schreidlerling had been flitting up and down the Mall all the afternoon in the
rain. Coming up along the Cart-road, a tonga passed me, and my pony, tired
with standing so long, set off at a canter. Just by the road down to the Tonga
Office Mrs. Schreiderling, dripping from head to foot, was waiting for the
tonga. I turned up-hill, as the tonga was no affair of mine; and just then she
began to shriek. I went back at once and saw, under the Tonga Office lamps,
Mrs. Schreiderling kneeling in the wet road by the back seat of the newly-
arrived tonga, screaming hideously.

Then she fell face down in the dirt as I came up.

Sitting in the back seat, very square and firm, with one hand on the awning-
stanchion and the wet pouring off his hat and moustache, was the Other Man--
dead. The sixty-mile up-hill jolt had been too much for his valve, I suppose.
The tonga-driver said:--"The Sahib died two stages out of Solon. Therefore, I
tied him with a rope, lest he should fall out by the way, and so came to
Simla. Will the Sahib give me bukshish? IT," pointing to the Other Man,
"should have given one rupee."

The Other Man sat with a grin on his face, as if he enjoyed the joke of his
arrival; and Mrs. Schreiderling, in the mud, began to groan. There was no one
except us four in the office and it was raining heavily. The first thing was
to take Mrs. Schreiderling home, and the second was to prevent her name from
being mixed up with the affair. The tonga-driver received five rupees to find
a bazar 'rickshaw for Mrs. Schreiderling. He was to tell the tonga Babu
afterwards of the Other Man, and the Babu was to make such arrangements as
seemed best.

Mrs. Schreiderling was carried into the shed out of the rain, and for three-
quarters of an hour we two waited for the 'rickshaw. The Other Man was left
exactly as he had arrived. Mrs. Schreiderling would do everything but cry,
which might have helped her. She tried to scream as soon as her senses came
back, and then she began praying for the Other Man's soul. Had she not been as
honest as the day, she would have prayed for her own soul too. I waited to
hear her do this, but she did not. Then I tried to get some of the mud off her
habit. Lastly, the 'rickshaw came, and I got her away--partly by force. It was
a terrible business from beginning to end; but most of all when the 'rickshaw
had to squeeze between the wall and the tonga, and she saw by the lamp-light
that thin, yellow hand grasping the awning-stanchion.

She was taken home just as every one was going to a dance at Viceregal Lodge--
"Peterhoff" it was then--and the doctor found that she had fallen from her
horse, that I had picked her up at the back of Jakko, and really deserved
great credit for the prompt manner in which I had secured medical aid. She did
not die--men of Schreiderling's stamp marry women who don't die easily. They
live and grow ugly.

She never told of her one meeting, since her marriage, with the Other Man;
and, when the chill and cough following the exposure of that evening, allowed
her abroad, she never by word or sign alluded to having met me by the Tonga
Office. Perhaps she never knew.

She used to trot up and down the Mall, on that shocking bad saddle, looking as
if she expected to meet some one round the corner every minute. Two years
afterward, she went Home, and died--at Bournemouth, I think.

Schreiderling, when he grew maudlin at Mess, used to talk about "my poor dear
wife." He always set great store on speaking his mind, did Schreiderling!



CONSEQUENCES.

Rosicrucian subtleties
In the Orient had rise;
Ye may find their teachers still
Under Jacatala's Hill.

Seek ye Bombast Paracelsus,
Read what Flood the Seeker tells us
Of the Dominant that runs
Through the cycles of the Suns--
Read my story last and see
Luna at her apogee.

There are yearly appointments, and two-yearly appointments, and five-yearly
appointments at Simla, and there are, or used to be, permanent appointments,
whereon you stayed up for the term of your natural life and secured red cheeks
and a nice income. Of course, you could descend in the cold weather; for Simla
is rather dull then.

Tarrion came from goodness knows where--all away and away in some forsaken
part of Central India, where they call Pachmari a "Sanitarium," and drive
behind trotting bullocks, I believe. He belonged to a regiment; but what he
really wanted to do was to escape from his regiment and live in Simla forever
and ever. He had no preference for anything in particular, beyond a good horse
and a nice partner. He thought he could do everything well; which is a
beautiful belief when you hold it with all your heart. He was clever in many
ways, and good to look at, and always made people round him comfortable--even
in Central India.

So he went up to Simla, and, because he was clever and amusing, he gravitated
naturally to Mrs. Hauksbee, who could forgive everything but stupidity. Once
he did her great service by changing the date on an invitation-card for a big
dance which Mrs. Hauksbee wished to attend, but couldn't because she had
quarrelled with the A.-D.-C., who took care, being a mean man, to invite her
to a small dance on the 6th instead of the big Ball of the 26th. It was a very
clever piece of forgery; and when Mrs. Hauksbee showed the A.-D.-C. her
invitation-card, and chaffed him mildly for not better managing his vendettas,
he really thought he had made a mistake; and--which was wise--realized that it
was no use to fight with Mrs. Hauksbee. She was grateful to Tarrion and asked
what she could do for him. He said simply: "I'm a Freelance up here on leave,
and on the lookout for what I can loot. I haven't a square inch of interest in
all Simla. My name isn't known to any man with an appointment in his gift, and
I want an appointment--a good, sound, pukka one. I believe you can do anything
you turn yourself to do. Will you help me?" Mrs. Hauksbee thought for a
minute, and passed the last of her riding-whip through her lips, as was her
custom when thinking.

Then her eyes sparkled, and she said:--"I will;" and she shook hands on it.
Tarrion, having perfect confidence in this great woman, took no further
thought of the business at all. Except to wonder what sort of an appointment
he would win.

Mrs. Hauksbee began calculating the prices of all the Heads of Departments and
Members of Council she knew, and the more she thought the more she laughed,
because her heart was in the game and it amused her. Then she took a Civil
List and ran over a few of the appointments. There are some beautiful
appointments in the Civil List. Eventually, she decided that, though Tarrion
was too good for the Political Department, she had better begin by trying to
get him in there. What were her own plans to this end, does not matter in the
least, for Luck or Fate played into her hands, and she had nothing to do but
to watch the course of events and take the credit of them.

All Viceroys, when they first come out, pass through the "Diplomatic Secrecy"
craze. It wears off in time; but they all catch it in the beginning, because
they are new to the country.

The particular Viceroy who was suffering from the complaint just then--this
was a long time ago, before Lord Dufferin ever came from Canada, or Lord Ripon
from the bosom of the English Church--had it very badly; and the result was
that men who were new to keeping official secrets went about looking unhappy;
and the Viceroy plumed himself on the way in which he had instilled notions of
reticence into his Staff.

Now, the Supreme Government have a careless custom of committing what they do
to printed papers. These papers deal with all sorts of things--from the
payment of Rs. 200 to a "secret service" native, up to rebukes administered to
Vakils and Motamids of Native States, and rather brusque letters to Native
Princes, telling them to put their houses in order, to refrain from kidnapping
women, or filling offenders with pounded red pepper, and eccentricities of
that kind. Of course, these things could never be made public, because Native
Princes never err officially, and their States are, officially, as well
administered as Our territories. Also, the private allowances to various queer
people are not exactly matters to put into newspapers, though they give quaint
reading sometimes.

When the Supreme Government is at Simla, these papers are prepared there, and
go round to the people who ought to see them in office-boxes or by post. The
principle of secrecy was to that Viceroy quite as important as the practice,
and he held that a benevolent despotism like Ours should never allow even
little things, such as appointments of subordinate clerks, to leak out till
the proper time. He was always remarkable for his principles.

There was a very important batch of papers in preparation at that time. It had
to travel from one end of Simla to the other by hand.

It was not put into an official envelope, but a large, square, pale-pink one;
the matter being in MS. on soft crinkly paper. It was addressed to "The Head
Clerk, etc., etc." Now, between "The Head Clerk, etc., etc.," and "Mrs.
Hauksbee" and a flourish, is no very great difference if the address be
written in a very bad hand, as this was. The chaprassi who took the envelope
was not more of an idiot than most chaprassis. He merely forgot where this
most unofficial cover was to be delivered, and so asked the first Englishman
he met, who happened to be a man riding down to Annandale in a great hurry.
The Englishman hardly looked, said: "Hauksbee Sahib ki Mem," and went on. So
did the chaprassi, because that letter was the last in stock and he wanted to
get his work over. There was no book to sign; he thrust the letter into Mrs.
Hauksbee's bearer's hands and went off to smoke with a friend.

Mrs. Hauksbee was expecting some cut-out pattern things in flimsy paper from a
friend. As soon as she got the big square packet, therefore, she said, "Oh,
the DEAR creature!" and tore it open with a paper-knife, and all the MS.
enclosures tumbled out on the floor.

Mrs. Hauksbee began reading. I have said the batch was rather important. That
is quite enough for you to know. It referred to some correspondence, two
measures, a peremptory order to a native chief and two dozen other things.
Mrs. Hauksbee gasped as she read, for the first glimpse of the naked machinery
of the Great Indian Government, stripped of its casings, and lacquer, and
paint, and guard-rails, impresses even the most stupid man. And Mrs. Hauksbee
was a clever woman. She was a little afraid at first, and felt as if she had
laid hold of a lightning-flash by the tail, and did not quite know what to do
with it. There were remarks and initials at the side of the papers; and some
of the remarks were rather more severe than the papers. The initials belonged
to men who are all dead or gone now; but they were great in their day.

Mrs. Hauksbee read on and thought calmly as she read. Then the value of her
trove struck her, and she cast about for the best method of using it. Then
Tarrion dropped in, and they read through all the papers together, and
Tarrion, not knowing how she had come by them, vowed that Mrs. Hauksbee was
the greatest woman on earth.

Which I believe was true, or nearly so.

"The honest course is always the best," said Tarrion after an hour and a half
of study and conversation. "All things considered, the Intelligence Branch is
about my form. Either that or the Foreign Office. I go to lay siege to the
High Gods in their Temples."

He did not seek a little man, or a little big man, or a weak Head of a strong
Department, but he called on the biggest and strongest man that the Government
owned, and explained that he wanted an appointment at Simla on a good salary.
The compound insolence of this amused the Strong Man, and, as he had nothing
to do for the moment, he listened to the proposals of the audacious Tarrion.

"You have, I presume, some special qualifications, besides the gift of self-
assertion, for the claims you put forwards?" said the Strong Man. "That, Sir,"
said Tarrion, "is for you to judge." Then he began, for he had a good memory,
quoting a few of the more important notes in the papers--slowly and one by one
as a man drops chlorodyne into a glass. When he had reached the peremptory
order--and it WAS a peremptory order--the Strong Man was troubled.

Tarrion wound up:--"And I fancy that special knowledge of this kind is at
least as valuable for, let us say, a berth in the Foreign Office, as the fact
of being the nephew of a distinguished officer's wife." That hit the Strong
Man hard, for the last appointment to the Foreign Office had been by black
favor, and he knew it. "I'll see what I can do for you," said the Strong Man.
"Many thanks," said Tarrion. Then he left, and the Strong Man departed to see
how the appointment was to be blocked.
   .  .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

Followed a pause of eleven days; with thunders and lightnings and much
telegraphing. The appointment was not a very important one, carrying only
between Rs. 500 and Rs. 700 a month; but, as the Viceroy said, it was the
principle of diplomatic secrecy that had to be maintained, and it was more
than likely that a boy so well supplied with special information would be
worth translating. So they translated him. They must have suspected him,
though he protested that his information was due to singular talents of his
own. Now, much of this story, including the after-history of the missing
envelope, you must fill in for yourself, because there are reasons why it
cannot be written. If you do not know about things Up Above, you won't
understand how to fill it in, and you will say it is impossible.

What the Viceroy said when Tarrion was introduced to him was:--"So, this is
the boy who 'rusked' the Government of India, is it? Recollect, Sir, that is
not done TWICE." So he must have known something.

What Tarrion said when he saw his appointment gazetted was:--"If Mrs. Hauksbee
were twenty years younger, and I her husband, I should be Viceroy of India in
twenty years."

What Mrs. Hauksbee said, when Tarrion thanked her, almost with tears in his
eyes, was first:--"I told you so!" and next, to herself:--"What fools men
are!"



THE CONVERSION OF AURELIAN McGOGGIN.

Ride with an idle whip, ride with an unused heel.
But, once in a way, there will come a day
When the colt must be taught to feel
The lash that falls, and the curb that galls,
And the sting of the rowelled steel.
               --Life's Handicap.

This is not a tale exactly. It is a Tract; and I am immensely proud of it.
Making a Tract is a Feat.

Every man is entitled to his own religious opinions; but no man--least of all
a junior--has a right to thrust these down other men's throats. The Government
sends out weird Civilians now and again; but McGoggin was the queerest
exported for a long time. He was clever--brilliantly clever--but his
cleverness worked the wrong way. Instead of keeping to the study of the
vernaculars, he had read some books written by a man called Comte, I think,
and a man called Spencer, and a Professor Clifford. [You will find these books
in the Library.] They deal with people's insides from the point of view of men
who have no stomachs. There was no order against his reading them; but his
Mamma should have smacked him.

They fermented in his head, and he came out to India with a rarefied religion
over and above his work. It was not much of a creed. It only proved that men
had no souls, and there was no God and no hereafter, and that you must worry
along somehow for the good of Humanity.

One of its minor tenets seemed to be that the one thing more sinful than
giving an order was obeying it. At least, that was what McGoggin said; but I
suspect he had misread his primers.

I do not say a word against this creed. It was made up in Town, where there is
nothing but machinery and asphalt and building--all shut in by the fog.
Naturally, a man grows to think that there is no one higher than himself, and
that the Metropolitan Board of Works made everything. But in this country,
where you really see humanity--raw, brown, naked humanity--with nothing
between it and the blazing sky, and only the used-up, over-handled earth
underfoot, the notion somehow dies away, and most folk come back to simpler
theories. Life, in India, is not long enough to waste in proving that there is
no one in particular at the head of affairs.

For this reason. The Deputy is above the Assistant, the Commissioner above the
Deputy, the Lieutenant-Governor above the Commissioner, and the Viceroy above
all four, under the orders of the Secretary of State, who is responsible to
the Empress. If the Empress be not responsible to her Maker--if there is no
Maker for her to be responsible to--the entire system of Our administration
must be wrong. Which is manifestly impossible. At Home men are to be excused.
They are stalled up a good deal and get intellectually "beany." When you take
a gross, 'beany" horse to exercise, he slavers and slobbers over the bit till
you can't see the horns.

But the bit is there just the same. Men do not get "beany" in India. The
climate and the work are against playing bricks with words.

If McGoggin had kept his creed, with the capital letters and the endings in
"isms," to himself, no one would have cared; but his grandfathers on both
sides had been Wesleyan preachers, and the preaching strain came out in his
mind. He wanted every one at the Club to see that they had no souls too, and
to help him to eliminate his Creator. As a good many men told him, HE
undoubtedly had no soul, because he was so young, but it did not follow that
his seniors were equally undeveloped; and, whether there was another world or
not, a man still wanted to read his papers in this. "But that is not the
point--that is not the point!" Aurelian used to say. Then men threw sofa-
cushions at him and told him to go to any particular place he might believe
in. They christened him the "Blastoderm"--he said he came from a family of
that name somewhere, in the pre-historic ages--and, by insult and laughter,
strove to choke him dumb, for he was an unmitigated nuisance at the Club;
besides being an offence to the older men. His Deputy Commissioner, who was
working on the Frontier when Aurelian was rolling on a bed-quilt, told him
that, for a clever boy, Aurelian was a very big idiot. And, you know, if he
had gone on with his work, he would have been caught up to the Secretariat in
a few years. He was just the type that goes there--all head, no physique and a
hundred theories. Not a soul was interested in McGoggin's soul. He might have
had two, or none, or somebody's else's. His business was to obey orders and
keep abreast of his files instead of devastating the Club with "isms."

He worked brilliantly; but he could not accept any order without trying to
better it. That was the fault of his creed. It made men too responsible and
left too much to their honor. You can sometimes ride an old horse in a halter;
but never a colt.

McGoggin took more trouble over his cases than any of the men of his year. He
may have fancied that thirty-page judgments on fifty-rupee cases--both sides
perjured to the gullet--advanced the cause of Humanity. At any rate, he worked
too much, and worried and fretted over the rebukes he received, and lectured
away on his ridiculous creed out of office, till the Doctor had to warn him
that he was overdoing it. No man can toil eighteen annas in the rupee in June
without suffering. But McGoggin was still intellectually "beany" and proud of
himself and his powers, and he would take no hint. He worked nine hours a day
steadily.

"Very well," said the doctor, "you'll break down because you are over-engined
for your beam." McGoggin was a little chap.

One day, the collapse came--as dramatically as if it had been meant to
embellish a Tract.

It was just before the Rains. We were sitting in the verandah in the dead,
hot, close air, gasping and praying that the black-blue clouds would let down
and bring the cool. Very, very far away, there was a faint whisper, which was
the roar of the Rains breaking over the river. One of the men heard it, got
out of his chair, listened, and said, naturally enough:--"Thank God!"

Then the Blastoderm turned in his place and said:--"Why? I assure you it's
only the result of perfectly natural causes--atmospheric phenomena of the
simplest kind. Why you should, therefore, return thanks to a Being who never
did exist--who is only a figment--"

"Blastoderm," grunted the man in the next chair, "dry up, and throw me over
the Pioneer. We know all about your figments." The Blastoderm reached out to
the table, took up one paper, and jumped as if something had stung him. Then
he handed the paper over.

"As I was saying," he went on slowly and with an effort--"due to perfectly
natural causes--perfectly natural causes. I mean--"

"Hi! Blastoderm, you've given me the Calcutta Mercantile Advertiser."

The dust got up in little whorls, while the treetops rocked and the kites
whistled. But no one was looking at the coming of the Rains.

We were all staring at the Blastoderm, who had risen from his chair and was
fighting with his speech. Then he said, still more slowly:--

"Perfectly conceivable--dictionary--red oak--amenable--cause--retaining--
shuttlecock--alone."

"Blastoderm's drunk," said one man. But the Blastoderm was not drunk. He
looked at us in a dazed sort of way, and began motioning with his hands in the
half light as the clouds closed overhead.

Then--with a scream:--

"What is it?--Can't--reserve--attainable--market--obscure--"

But his speech seemed to freeze in him, and--just as the lightning shot two
tongues that cut the whole sky into three pieces and the rain fell in
quivering sheets--the Blastoderm was struck dumb. He stood pawing and champing
like a hard-held horse, and his eyes were full of terror.

The Doctor came over in three minutes, and heard the story. "It's aphasia," he
said. "Take him to his room. I KNEW the smash would come." We carried the
Blastoderm across, in the pouring rain, to his quarters, and the Doctor gave
him bromide of potassium to make him sleep.

Then the Doctor came back to us and told us that aphasia was like all the
arrears of "Punjab Head" falling in a lump; and that only once before--in the
case of a sepoy--had he met with so complete a case. I myself have seen mild
aphasia in an overworked man, but this sudden dumbness was uncanny--though, as
the Blastoderm himself might have said, due to "perfectly natural causes."

"He'll have to take leave after this," said the Doctor. "He won't be fit for
work for another three months. No; it isn't insanity or anything like it. It's
only complete loss of control over the speech and memory. I fancy it will keep
the Blastoderm quiet, though."

Two days later, the Blastoderm found his tongue again. The first question he
asked was: "What was it?" The Doctor enlightened him.

"But I can't understand it!" said the Blastoderm; "I'm quite sane; but I can't
be sure of my mind, it seems--my OWN memory--can I?"

"Go up into the Hills for three months, and don't think about it," said the
Doctor.

"But I can't understand it," repeated the Blastoderm. "It was my OWN mind and
memory."

"I can't help it," said the Doctor; "there are a good many things you can't
understand; and, by the time you have put in my length of service, you'll know
exactly how much a man dare call his own in this world."

The stroke cowed the Blastoderm. He could not understand it. He went into the
Hills in fear and trembling, wondering whether he would be permitted to reach
the end of any sentence he began.

This gave him a wholesome feeling of mistrust. The legitimate explanation,
that he had been overworking himself, failed to satisfy him. Something had
wiped his lips of speech, as a mother wipes the milky lips of her child, and
he was afraid--horribly afraid.

So the Club had rest when he returned; and if ever you come across Aurelian
McGoggin laying down the law on things Human--he doesn't seem to know as much
as he used to about things Divine--put your forefinger on your lip for a
moment, and see what happens.

Don't blame me if he throws a glass at your head!



A GERM DESTROYER.

Pleasant it is for the Little Tin Gods,
  When great Jove nods;
But Little Tin Gods make their little mistakes
  In missing the hour when great Jove wakes.

As a general rule, it is inexpedient to meddle with questions of State in a
land where men are highly paid to work them out for you.

This tale is a justifiable exception.

Once in every five years, as you know, we indent for a new Viceroy; and each
Viceroy imports, with the rest of his baggage, a Private Secretary, who may or
may not be the real Viceroy, just as Fate ordains. Fate looks after the Indian
Empire because it is so big and so helpless.

There was a Viceroy once, who brought out with him a turbulent Private
Secretary--a hard man with a soft manner and a morbid passion for work. This
Secretary was called Wonder--John Fennil Wonder. The Viceroy possessed no
name--nothing but a string of counties and two-thirds of the alphabet after
them. He said, in confidence, that he was the electro-plated figurehead of a
golden administration, and he watched in a dreamy, amused way Wonder's
attempts to draw matters which were entirely outside his province into his own
hands. "When we are all cherubims together," said His Excellency once, "my
dear, good friend Wonder will head the conspiracy for plucking out Gabriel's
tail-feathers or stealing Peter's keys. THEN I shall report him."

But, though the Viceroy did nothing to check Wonder's officiousness, other
people said unpleasant things. Maybe the Members of Council began it; but,
finally, all Simla agreed that there was "too much Wonder, and too little
Viceroy," in that regime. Wonder was always quoting "His Excellency." It was
"His Excellency this," "His Excellency that," "In the opinion of His
Excellency," and so on. The Viceroy smiled; but he did not heed.

He said that, so long as his old men squabbled with his "dear, good Wonder,"
they might be induced to leave the "Immemorial East" in peace.

"No wise man has a policy," said the Viceroy. "A Policy is the blackmail
levied on the Fool by the Unforeseen. I am not the former, and I do not
believe in the latter."

I do not quite see what this means, unless it refers to an Insurance Policy.
Perhaps it was the Viceroy's way of saying:--"Lie low."

That season, came up to Simla one of these crazy people with only a single
idea. These are the men who make things move; but they are not nice to talk
to. This man's name was Mellish, and he had lived for fifteen years on land of
his own, in Lower Bengal, studying cholera. He held that cholera was a germ
that propagated itself as it flew through a muggy atmosphere; and stuck in the
branches of trees like a wool-flake. The germ could be rendered sterile, he
said, by "Mellish's Own Invincible Fumigatory"--a heavy violet-black powder--
"the result of fifteen years' scientific investigation, Sir!"

Inventors seem very much alike as a caste. They talk loudly, especially about
"conspiracies of monopolists;" they beat upon the table with their fists; and
they secrete fragments of their inventions about their persons.

Mellish said that there was a Medical "Ring" at Simla, headed by the Surgeon-
General, who was in league, apparently, with all the Hospital Assistants in
the Empire. I forget exactly how he proved it, but it had something to do with
"skulking up to the Hills;" and what Mellish wanted was the independent
evidence of the Viceroy--"Steward of our Most Gracious Majesty the Queen,
Sir." So Mellish went up to Simla, with eighty-four pounds of Fumigatory in
his trunk, to speak to the Viceroy and to show him the merits of the
invention.

But it is easier to see a Viceroy than to talk to him, unless you chance to be
as important as Mellishe of Madras. He was a six-thousand-rupee man, so great
that his daughters never "married." They "contracted alliances." He himself
was not paid. He "received emoluments," and his journeys about the country
were "tours of observation." His business was to stir up the people in Madras
with a long pole--as you stir up stench in a pond--and the people had to come
up out of their comfortable old ways and gasp:--"This is Enlightenment and
progress. Isn't it fine!" Then they gave Mellishe statues and jasmine
garlands, in the hope of getting rid of him.

Mellishe came up to Simla "to confer with the Viceroy." That was one of his
perquisites. The Viceroy knew nothing of Mellishe except that he was "one of
those middle-class deities who seem necessary to the spiritual comfort of this
Paradise of the Middle-classes," and that, in all probability, he had
"suggested, designed, founded, and endowed all the public institutions in
Madras." Which proves that His Excellency, though dreamy, had experience of
the ways of six-thousand-rupee men.

Mellishe's name was E. Mellishe and Mellish's was E. S. Mellish, and they were
both staying at the same hotel, and the Fate that looks after the Indian
Empire ordained that Wonder should blunder and drop the final "e;" that the
Chaprassi should help him, and that the note which ran: "Dear Mr. Mellish.--
Can you set aside your other engagements and lunch with us at two tomorrow?
His Excellency has an hour at your disposal then," should be given to Mellish
with the Fumigatory. He nearly wept with pride and delight, and at the
appointed hour cantered off to Peterhoff, a big paper-bag full of the
Fumigatory in his coat-tail pockets. He had his chance, and he meant to make
the most of it. Mellishe of Madras had been so portentously solemn about his
"conference," that Wonder had arranged for a private tiffin--no A.-D.-C.'s, no
Wonder, no one but the Viceroy, who said plaintively that he feared being left
alone with unmuzzled autocrats like the great Mellishe of Madras.

But his guest did not bore the Viceroy. On the contrary, he amused him.
Mellish was nervously anxious to go straight to his Fumigatory, and talked at
random until tiffin was over and His Excellency asked him to smoke. The
Viceroy was pleased with Mellish because he did not talk "shop."

As soon as the cheroots were lit, Mellish spoke like a man; beginning with his
cholera-theory, reviewing his fifteen years' "scientific labors," the
machinations of the "Simla Ring," and the excellence of his Fumigatory, while
the Viceroy watched him between half-shut eyes and thought: "Evidently, this
is the wrong tiger; but it is an original animal." Mellish's hair was standing
on end with excitement, and he stammered. He began groping in his coat-tails
and, before the Viceroy knew what was about to happen, he had tipped a bagful
of his powder into the big silver ash-tray.

"J-j-judge for yourself, Sir," said Mellish. "Y' Excellency shall judge for
yourself! Absolutely infallible, on my honor."

He plunged the lighted end of his cigar into the powder, which began to smoke
like a volcano, and send up fat, greasy wreaths of copper-colored smoke. In
five seconds the room was filled with a most pungent and sickening stench--a
reek that took fierce hold of the trap of your windpipe and shut it. The
powder then hissed and fizzed, and sent out blue and green sparks, and the
smoke rose till you could neither see, nor breathe, nor gasp. Mellish,
however, was used to it.

"Nitrate of strontia," he shouted; "baryta, bone-meal, etcetera! Thousand
cubic feet smoke per cubic inch. Not a germ could live--not a germ, Y'
Excellency!"

But His Excellency had fled, and was coughing at the foot of the stairs, while
all Peterhoff hummed like a hive. Red Lancers came in, and the Head Chaprassi,
who speaks English, came in, and mace-bearers came in, and ladies ran
downstairs screaming "fire;" for the smoke was drifting through the house and
oozing out of the windows, and bellying along the verandahs, and wreathing and
writhing across the gardens. No one could enter the room where Mellish was
lecturing on his Fumigatory, till that unspeakable powder had burned itself
out.

Then an Aide-de-Camp, who desired the V. C., rushed through the rolling clouds
and hauled Mellish into the hall. The Viceroy was prostrate with laughter, and
could only waggle his hands feebly at Mellish, who was shaking a fresh bagful
of powder at him.

"Glorious! Glorious!" sobbed his Excellency. "Not a germ, as you justly
observe, could exist! I can swear it. A magnificent success!"

Then he laughed till the tears came, and Wonder, who had caught the real
Mellishe snorting on the Mall, entered and was deeply shocked at the scene.
But the Viceroy was delighted, because he saw that Wonder would presently
depart. Mellish with the Fumigatory was also pleased, for he felt that he had
smashed the Simla Medical "Ring."
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

Few men could tell a story like His Excellency when he took the trouble, and
the account of "my dear, good Wonder's friend with the powder" went the round
of Simla, and flippant folk made Wonder unhappy by their remarks.

But His Excellency told the tale once too often--for Wonder. As he meant to
do. It was at a Seepee Picnic. Wonder was sitting just behind the Viceroy.

"And I really thought for a moment," wound up His Excellency, "that my dear,
good Wonder had hired an assassin to clear his way to the throne!"

Every one laughed; but there was a delicate subtinkle in the Viceroy's tone
which Wonder understood. He found that his health was giving way; and the
Viceroy allowed him to go, and presented him with a flaming "character" for
use at Home among big people.

"My fault entirely," said His Excellency, in after seasons, with a twinkling
in his eye. "My inconsistency must always have been distasteful to such a
masterly man."



KIDNAPPED.

There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken any way you please, is bad,
And strands them in forsaken guts and creeks
No decent soul would think of visiting.

You cannot stop the tide; but now and then,
You may arrest some rash adventurer
Who--h'm--will hardly thank you for your pains.
             --Vibart's Moralities.

We are a high-caste and enlightened race, and infant-marriage is very shocking
and the consequences are sometimes peculiar; but, nevertheless, the Hindu
notion--which is the Continental notion--which is the aboriginal notion--of
arranging marriages irrespective of the personal inclinations of the married,
is sound. Think for a minute, and you will see that it must be so; unless, of
course, you believe in "affinities." In which case you had better not read
this tale. How can a man who has never married; who cannot be trusted to pick
up at sight a moderately sound horse; whose head is hot and upset with visions
of domestic felicity, go about the choosing of a wife? He cannot see straight
or think straight if he tries; and the same disadvantages exist in the case of
a girl's fancies. But when mature, married and discreet people arrange a match
between a boy and a girl, they do it sensibly, with a view to the future, and
the young couple live happily ever afterwards. As everybody knows.

Properly speaking, Government should establish a Matrimonial Department,
efficiently officered, with a Jury of Matrons, a Judge of the Chief Court, a
Senior Chaplain, and an Awful Warning, in the shape of a love-match that has
gone wrong, chained to the trees in the courtyard. All marriages should be
made through the Department, which might be subordinate to the Educational
Department, under the same penalty as that attaching to the transfer of land
without a stamped document. But Government won't take suggestions. It pretends
that it is too busy. However, I will put my notion on record, and explain the
example that illustrates the theory.

Once upon a time there was a good young man--a first-class officer in his own
Department--a man with a career before him and, possibly, a K. C. G. E. at the
end of it. All his superiors spoke well of him, because he knew how to hold
his tongue and his pen at the proper times. There are today only eleven men in
India who possess this secret; and they have all, with one exception, attained
great honor and enormous incomes.

This good young man was quiet and self-contained--too old for his years by
far. Which always carries its own punishment. Had a Subaltern, or a Tea-
Planter's Assistant, or anybody who enjoys life and has no care for tomorrow,
done what he tried to do not a soul would have cared. But when Peythroppe--the
estimable, virtuous, economical, quiet, hard-working, young Peythroppe--fell,
there was a flutter through five Departments.

The manner of his fall was in this way. He met a Miss Castries--d'Castries it
was originally, but the family dropped the d' for administrative reasons--and
he fell in love with her even more energetically than he worked. Understand
clearly that there was not a breath of a word to be said against Miss
Castries--not a shadow of a breath. She was good and very lovely--possessed
what innocent people at home call a "Spanish" complexion, with thick blue-
black hair growing low down on her forehead, into a "widow's peak," and big
violet eyes under eyebrows as black and as straight as the borders of a
Gazette Extraordinary when a big man dies. But--but--but--. Well, she was a
VERY sweet girl and very pious, but for many reasons she was "impossible."
Quite so. All good Mammas know what "impossible" means. It was obviously
absurd that Peythroppe should marry her. The little opal-tinted onyx at the
base of her finger-nails said this as plainly as print. Further, marriage with
Miss Castries meant marriage with several other Castries--Honorary Lieutenant
Castries, her Papa, Mrs. Eulalie Castries, her Mamma, and all the
ramifications of the Castries family, on incomes ranging from Rs. 175 to Rs.
470 a month, and THEIR wives and connections again.

It would have been cheaper for Peythroppe to have assaulted a Commissioner
with a dog-whip, or to have burned the records of a Deputy Commissioner's
Office, than to have contracted an alliance with the Castries. It would have
weighted his after-career less--even under a Government which never forgets
and NEVER forgives.

Everybody saw this but Peythroppe. He was going to marry Miss Castries, he
was--being of age and drawing a good income--and woe betide the house that
would not afterwards receive Mrs. Virginie Saulez Peythroppe with the
deference due to her husband's rank.

That was Peythroppe's ultimatum, and any remonstrance drove him frantic.

These sudden madnesses most afflict the sanest men. There was a case once--but
I will tell you of that later on. You cannot account for the mania, except
under a theory directly contradicting the one about the Place wherein
marriages are made. Peythroppe was burningly anxious to put a millstone round
his neck at the outset of his career and argument had not the least effect on
him. He was going to marry Miss Castries, and the business was his own
business.

He would thank you to keep your advice to yourself. With a man in this
condition, mere words only fix him in his purpose. Of course he cannot see
that marriage out here does not concern the individual but the Government he
serves.

Do you remember Mrs. Hauksbee--the most wonderful woman in India? She saved
Pluffles from Mrs. Reiver, won Tarrion his appointment in the Foreign Office,
and was defeated in open field by Mrs. Cusack-Bremmil. She heard of the
lamentable condition of Peythroppe, and her brain struck out the plan that
saved him. She had the wisdom of the Serpent, the logical coherence of the
Man, the fearlessness of the Child, and the triple intuition of the Woman.
Never--no, never--as long as a tonga buckets down the Solon dip, or the
couples go a-riding at the back of Summer Hill, will there be such a genius as
Mrs. Hauksbee. She attended the consultation of Three Men on Peythroppe's
case; and she stood up with the lash of her riding-whip between her lips and
spake.
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

Three weeks later, Peythroppe dined with the Three Men, and the Gazette of
India came in. Peythroppe found to his surprise that he had been gazetted a
month's leave. Don't ask me how this was managed. I believe firmly that if
Mrs. Hauksbee gave the order, the whole Great Indian Administration would
stand on its head.

The Three Men had also a month's leave each. Peythroppe put the Gazette down
and said bad words. Then there came from the compound the soft "pad-pad" of
camels--"thieves' camels," the bikaneer breed that don't bubble and howl when
they sit down and get up.

After that I don't know what happened. This much is certain.

Peythroppe disappeared--vanished like smoke--and the long foot-rest chair in
the house of the Three Men was broken to splinters. Also a bedstead departed
from one of the bedrooms.

Mrs. Hauksbee said that Mr. Peythroppe was shooting in Rajputana with the
Three Men; so we were compelled to believe her.

At the end of the month, Peythroppe was gazetted twenty days' extension of
leave; but there was wrath and lamentation in the house of Castries. The
marriage-day had been fixed, but the bridegroom never came; and the D'Silvas,
Pereiras, and Ducketts lifted their voices and mocked Honorary Lieutenant
Castries as one who had been basely imposed upon. Mrs. Hauksbee went to the
wedding, and was much astonished when Peythroppe did not appear. After seven
weeks, Peythroppe and the Three Men returned from Rajputana. Peythroppe was in
hard, tough condition, rather white, and more self-contained than ever.

One of the Three Men had a cut on his nose, cause by the kick of a gun.
Twelve-bores kick rather curiously.

Then came Honorary Lieutenant Castries, seeking for the blood of his
perfidious son-in-law to be. He said things--vulgar and "impossible" things
which showed the raw rough "ranker" below the "Honorary," and I fancy
Peythroppe's eyes were opened. Anyhow, he held his peace till the end; when he
spoke briefly. Honorary Lieutenant Castries asked for a "peg" before he went
away to die or bring a suit for breach of promise.

Miss Castries was a very good girl. She said that she would have no breach of
promise suits. She said that, if she was not a lady, she was refined enough to
know that ladies kept their broken hearts to themselves; and, as she ruled her
parents, nothing happened. Later on, she married a most respectable and
gentlemanly person. He travelled for an enterprising firm in Calcutta, and was
all that a good husband should be.

So Peythroppe came to his right mind again, and did much good work, and was
honored by all who knew him. One of these days he will marry; but he will
marry a sweet pink-and-white maiden, on the Government House List, with a
little money and some influential connections, as every wise man should. And
he will never, all his life, tell her what happened during the seven weeks of
his shooting-tour in Rajputana.

But just think how much trouble and expense--for camel hire is not cheap, and
those Bikaneer brutes had to be fed like humans--might have been saved by a
properly conducted Matrimonial Department, under the control of the Director
General of Education, but corresponding direct with the Viceroy.



THE ARREST OF LIEUTENANT GOLIGHTLY.

"'I've forgotten the countersign,' sez 'e.

'Oh! You 'ave, 'ave you?' sez I.

'But I'm the Colonel,' sez 'e.

'Oh! You are, are you?' sez I. 'Colonel nor no Colonel, you waits 'ere till
I'm relieved, an' the Sarjint reports on your ugly old mug. Coop!' sez I.

   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

An' s'help me soul, 'twas the Colonel after all! But I was a recruity then."

         The Unedited Autobiography of Private Ortheris.

IF there was one thing on which Golightly prided himself more than another, it
was looking like "an Officer and a gentleman." He said it was for the honor of
the Service that he attired himself so elaborately; but those who knew him
best said that it was just personal vanity. There was no harm about Golightly-
-not an ounce.

He recognized a horse when he saw one, and could do more than fill a cantle.
He played a very fair game at billiards, and was a sound man at the whist-
table. Everyone liked him; and nobody ever dreamed of seeing him handcuffed on
a station platform as a deserter. But this sad thing happened.

He was going down from Dalhousie, at the end of his leave--riding down. He had
cut his leave as fine as he dared, and wanted to come down in a hurry.

It was fairly warm at Dalhousie, and knowing what to expect below, he
descended in a new khaki suit--tight fitting--of a delicate olive-green; a
peacock-blue tie, white collar, and a snowy white solah helmet. He prided
himself on looking neat even when he was riding post. He did look neat, and he
was so deeply concerned about his appearance before he started that he quite
forgot to take anything but some small change with him. He left all his notes
at the hotel. His servants had gone down the road before him, to be ready in
waiting at Pathankote with a change of gear. That was what he called
travelling in "light marching-order." He was proud of his faculty of
organization--what we call bundobust.

Twenty-two miles out of Dalhousie it began to rain--not a mere hill-shower,
but a good, tepid monsoonish downpour. Golightly bustled on, wishing that he
had brought an umbrella. The dust on the roads turned into mud, and the pony
mired a good deal. So did Golightly's khaki gaiters. But he kept on steadily
and tried to think how pleasant the coolth was.

His next pony was rather a brute at starting, and Golightly's hands being
slippery with the rain, contrived to get rid of Golightly at a corner. He
chased the animal, caught it, and went ahead briskly.

The spill had not improved his clothes or his temper, and he had lost one
spur. He kept the other one employed. By the time that stage was ended, the
pony had had as much exercise as he wanted, and, in spite of the rain,
Golightly was sweating freely. At the end of another miserable half-hour,
Golightly found the world disappear before his eyes in clammy pulp. The rain
had turned the pith of his huge and snowy solah-topee into an evil-smelling
dough, and it had closed on his head like a half-opened mushroom. Also the
green lining was beginning to run.

Golightly did not say anything worth recording here. He tore off and squeezed
up as much of the brim as was in his eyes and ploughed on. The back of the
helmet was flapping on his neck and the sides stuck to his ears, but the
leather band and green lining kept things roughly together, so that the hat
did not actually melt away where it flapped.

Presently, the pulp and the green stuff made a sort of slimy mildew which ran
over Golightly in several directions--down his back and bosom for choice. The
khaki color ran too--it was really shockingly bad dye--and sections of
Golightly were brown, and patches were violet, and contours were ochre, and
streaks were ruddy red, and blotches were nearly white, according to the
nature and peculiarities of the dye. When he took out his handkerchief to wipe
his face and the green of the hat-lining and the purple stuff that had soaked
through on to his neck from the tie became thoroughly mixed, the effect was
amazing.

Near Dhar the rain stopped and the evening sun came out and dried him up
slightly. It fixed the colors, too. Three miles from Pathankote the last pony
fell dead lame, and Golightly was forced to walk. He pushed on into Pathankote
to find his servants. He did not know then that his khitmatgar had stopped by
the roadside to get drunk, and would come on the next day saying that he had
sprained his ankle. When he got into Pathankote, he couldn't find his
servants, his boots were stiff and ropy with mud, and there were large
quantities of dirt about his body. The blue tie had run as much as the khaki.
So he took it off with the collar and threw it away. Then he said something
about servants generally and tried to get a peg. He paid eight annas for the
drink, and this revealed to him that he had only six annas more in his pocket-
-or in the world as he stood at that hour.

He went to the Station-Master to negotiate for a first-class ticket to Khasa,
where he was stationed. The booking-clerk said something to the Station-
Master, the Station-Master said something to the Telegraph Clerk, and the
three looked at him with curiosity. They asked him to wait for half-an-hour,
while they telegraphed to Umritsar for authority. So he waited, and four
constables came and grouped themselves picturesquely round him. Just as he was
preparing to ask them to go away, the Station-Master said that he would give
the Sahib a ticket to Umritsar, if the Sahib would kindly come inside the
booking-office. Golightly stepped inside, and the next thing he knew was that
a constable was attached to each of his legs and arms, while the Station-
Master was trying to cram a mailbag over his head.

There was a very fair scuffle all round the booking-office, and Golightly
received a nasty cut over his eye through falling against a table. But the
constables were too much for him, and they and the Station-Master handcuffed
him securely. As soon as the mail-bag was slipped, he began expressing his
opinions, and the head-constable said:--"Without doubt this is the soldier-
Englishman we required. Listen to the abuse!" Then Golightly asked the
Station-Master what the this and the that the proceedings meant. The Station-
Master told him he was "Private John Binkle of the----Regiment, 5 ft. 9 in.,
fair hair, gray eyes, and a dissipated appearance, no marks on the body," who
had deserted a fortnight ago. Golightly began explaining at great length; and
the more he explained the less the Station-Master believed him. He said that
no Lieutenant could look such a ruffian as did Golightly, and that his
instructions were to send his capture under proper escort to Umritsar.
Golightly was feeling very damp and uncomfortable, and the language he used
was not fit for publication, even in an expurgated form. The four constables
saw him safe to Umritsar in an "intermediate" compartment, and he spent the
four-hour journey in abusing them as fluently as his knowledge of the
vernaculars allowed.

At Umritsar he was bundled out on the platform into the arms of a Corporal and
two men of the----Regiment. Golightly drew himself up and tried to carry off
matters jauntily. He did not feel too jaunty in handcuffs, with four
constables behind him, and the blood from the cut on his forehead stiffening
on his left cheek. The Corporal was not jocular either. Golightly got as far
as--"This is a very absurd mistake, my men," when the Corporal told him to
"stow his lip" and come along. Golightly did not want to come along. He
desired to stop and explain. He explained very well indeed, until the Corporal
cut in with:--"YOU a orficer! It's the like o' YOU as brings disgrace on the
likes of US. Bloom-in' fine orficer you are! I know your regiment. The Rogue's
March is the quickstep where you come from. You're a black shame to the
Service."

Golightly kept his temper, and began explaining all over again from the
beginning. Then he was marched out of the rain into the refreshment-room and
told not to make a qualified fool of himself.

The men were going to run him up to Fort Govindghar. And "running up" is a
performance almost as undignified as the Frog March.

Golightly was nearly hysterical with rage and the chill and the mistake and
the handcuffs and the headache that the cut on his forehead had given him. He
really laid himself out to express what was in his mind. When he had quite
finished and his throat was feeling dry, one of the men said:--"I've 'eard a
few beggars in the click blind, stiff and crack on a bit; but I've never 'eard
any one to touch this 'ere 'orficer.'" They were not angry with him. They
rather admired him. They had some beer at the refreshment-room, and offered
Golightly some too, because he had "swore won'erful." They asked him to tell
them all about the adventures of Private John Binkle while he was loose on the
countryside; and that made Golightly wilder than ever. If he had kept his wits
about him he would have kept quiet until an officer came; but he attempted to
run.

Now the butt of a Martini in the small of your back hurts a great deal, and
rotten, rain-soaked khaki tears easily when two men are jerking at your
collar.

Golightly rose from the floor feeling very sick and giddy, with his shirt
ripped open all down his breast and nearly all down his back.

He yielded to his luck, and at that point the down-train from Lahore came in
carrying one of Golightly's Majors.

This is the Major's evidence in full:--

"There was the sound of a scuffle in the second-class refreshment-room, so I
went in and saw the most villainous loafer that I ever set eyes on. His boots
and breeches were plastered with mud and beer-stains. He wore a muddy-white
dunghill sort of thing on his head, and it hung down in slips on his
shoulders, which were a good deal scratched. He was half in and half out of a
shirt as nearly in two pieces as it could be, and he was begging the guard to
look at the name on the tail of it. As he had rucked the shirt all over his
head, I couldn't at first see who he was, but I fancied that he was a man in
the first stage of D. T. from the way he swore while he wrestled with his
rags. When he turned round, and I had made allowance for a lump as big as a
pork-pie over one eye, and some green war-paint on the face, and some violet
stripes round the neck, I saw that it was Golightly. He was very glad to see
me," said the Major, "and he hoped I would not tell the Mess about it. I
didn't, but you can if you like, now that Golightly has gone Home."

Golightly spent the greater part of that summer in trying to get the Corporal
and the two soldiers tried by Court-Martial for arresting an "officer and a
gentleman." They were, of course, very sorry for their error. But the tale
leaked into the regimental canteen, and thence ran about the Province.



THE HOUSE OF SUDDHOO

A stone's throw out on either hand
From that well-ordered road we tread,
  And all the world is wild and strange;
Churel and ghoul and Djinn and sprite
Shall bear us company tonight,
For we have reached the Oldest Land
  Wherein the Powers of Darkness range.
      --From the Dusk to the Dawn.

The house of Suddhoo, near the Taksali Gate, is two-storied, with four carved
windows of old brown wood, and a flat roof. You may recognize it by five red
hand-prints arranged like the Five of Diamonds on the whitewash between the
upper windows. Bhagwan Dass, the bunnia, and a man who says he gets his living
by seal-cutting, live in the lower story with a troop of wives, servants,
friends, and retainers. The two upper rooms used to be occupied by Janoo and
Azizun and a little black-and-tan terrier that was stolen from an Englishman's
house and given to Janoo by a soldier. Today, only Janoo lives in the upper
rooms. Suddhoo sleeps on the roof generally, except when he sleeps in the
street. He used to go to Peshawar in the cold weather to visit his son, who
sells curiosities near the Edwardes' Gate, and then he slept under a real mud
roof.

Suddhoo is a great friend of mine, because his cousin had a son who secured,
thanks to my recommendation, the post of head-messenger to a big firm in the
Station. Suddhoo says that God will make me a Lieutenant-Governor one of these
days. I daresay his prophecy will come true. He is very, very old, with white
hair and no teeth worth showing, and he has outlived his wits--outlived nearly
everything except his fondness for his son at Peshawar. Janoo and Azizun are
Kashmiris, Ladies of the City, and theirs was an ancient and more or less
honorable profession; but Azizun has since married a medical student from the
North-West and has settled down to a most respectable life somewhere near
Bareilly. Bhagwan Dass is an extortionate and an adulterator. He is very rich.
The man who is supposed to get his living by seal-cutting pretends to be very
poor.

This lets you know as much as is necessary of the four principal tenants in
the house of Suddhoo. Then there is Me, of course; but I am only the chorus
that comes in at the end to explain things. So I do not count.

Suddhoo was not clever. The man who pretended to cut seals was the cleverest
of them all--Bhagwan Dass only knew how to lie--except Janoo. She was also
beautiful, but that was her own affair.

Suddhoo's son at Peshawar was attacked by pleurisy, and old Suddhoo was
troubled. The seal-cutter man heard of Suddhoo's anxiety and made capital out
of it. He was abreast of the times. He got a friend in Peshawar to telegraph
daily accounts of the son's health.

And here the story begins.

Suddhoo's cousin's son told me, one evening, that Suddhoo wanted to see me;
that he was too old and feeble to come personally, and that I should be
conferring an everlasting honor on the House of Suddhoo if I went to him. I
went; but I think, seeing how well-off Suddhoo was then, that he might have
sent something better than an ekka, which jolted fearfully, to haul out a
future Lieutenant-Governor to the City on a muggy April evening. The ekka did
not run quickly.

It was full dark when we pulled up opposite the door of Ranjit Singh's Tomb
near the main gate of the Fort. Here was Suddhoo and he said that, by reason
of my condescension, it was absolutely certain that I should become a
Lieutenant-Governor while my hair was yet black. Then we talked about the
weather and the state of my health, and the wheat crops, for fifteen minutes,
in the Huzuri Bagh, under the stars.

Suddhoo came to the point at last. He said that Janoo had told him that there
was an order of the Sirkar against magic, because it was feared that magic
might one day kill the Empress of India. I didn't know anything about the
state of the law; but I fancied that something interesting was going to
happen. I said that so far from magic being discouraged by the Government it
was highly commended.

The greatest officials of the State practiced it themselves. (If the Financial
Statement isn't magic, I don't know what is.) Then, to encourage him further,
I said that, if there was any jadoo afoot, I had not the least objection to
giving it my countenance and sanction, and to seeing that it was clean jadoo--
white magic, as distinguished from the unclean jadoo which kills folk. It took
a long time before Suddhoo admitted that this was just what he had asked me to
come for. Then he told me, in jerks and quavers, that the man who said he cut
seals was a sorcerer of the cleanest kind; that every day he gave Suddhoo news
of the sick son in Peshawar more quickly than the lightning could fly, and
that this news was always corroborated by the letters. Further, that he had
told Suddhoo how a great danger was threatening his son, which could be
removed by clean jadoo; and, of course, heavy payment. I began to see how the
land lay, and told Suddhoo that I also understood a little jadoo in the
Western line, and would go to his house to see that everything was done
decently and in order. We set off together; and on the way Suddhoo told me he
had paid the seal-cutter between one hundred and two hundred rupees already;
and the jadoo of that night would cost two hundred more. Which was cheap, he
said, considering the greatness of his son's danger; but I do not think he
meant it.

The lights were all cloaked in the front of the house when we arrived. I could
hear awful noises from behind the seal-cutter's shop-front, as if some one
were groaning his soul out. Suddhoo shook all over, and while we groped our
way upstairs told me that the jadoo had begun. Janoo and Azizun met us at the
stair-head, and told us that the jadoo-work was coming off in their rooms,
because there was more space there. Janoo is a lady of a freethinking turn of
mind. She whispered that the jadoo was an invention to get money out of
Suddhoo, and that the seal-cutter would go to a hot place when he died.
Suddhoo was nearly crying with fear and old age. He kept walking up and down
the room in the half light, repeating his son's name over and over again, and
asking Azizun if the seal-cutter ought not to make a reduction in the case of
his own landlord.

Janoo pulled me over to the shadow in the recess of the carved bow-windows.
The boards were up, and the rooms were only lit by one tiny lamp. There was no
chance of my being seen if I stayed still.

Presently, the groans below ceased, and we heard steps on the staircase. That
was the seal-cutter. He stopped outside the door as the terrier barked and
Azizun fumbled at the chain, and he told Suddhoo to blow out the lamp. This
left the place in jet darkness, except for the red glow from the two huqas
that belonged to Janoo and Azizun. The seal-cutter came in, and I heard
Suddhoo throw himself down on the floor and groan. Azizun caught her breath,
and Janoo backed to one of the beds with a shudder. There was a clink of
something metallic, and then shot up a pale blue-green flame near the ground.
The light was just enough to show Azizun, pressed against one corner of the
room with the terrier between her knees; Janoo, with her hands clasped,
leaning forward as she sat on the bed; Suddhoo, face down, quivering, and the
seal-cutter.

I hope I may never see another man like that seal-cutter. He was stripped to
the waist, with a wreath of white jasmine as thick as my wrist round his
forehead, a salmon-colored loin-cloth round his middle, and a steel bangle on
each ankle. This was not awe-inspiring. It was the face of the man that turned
me cold. It was blue-gray in the first place. In the second, the eyes were
rolled back till you could only see the whites of them; and, in the third, the
face was the face of a demon--a ghoul--anything you please except of the
sleek, oily old ruffian who sat in the day-time over his turning-lathe
downstairs. He was lying on his stomach, with his arms turned and crossed
behind him, as if he had been thrown down pinioned. His head and neck were the
only parts of him off the floor. They were nearly at right angles to the body,
like the head of a cobra at spring. It was ghastly. In the centre of the room,
on the bare earth floor, stood a big, deep, brass basin, with a pale blue-
green light floating in the centre like a night-light. Round that basin the
man on the floor wriggled himself three times. How he did it I do not know. I
could see the muscles ripple along his spine and fall smooth again; but I
could not see any other motion.

The head seemed the only thing alive about him, except that slow curl and
uncurl of the laboring back-muscles. Janoo from the bed was breathing seventy
to the minute; Azizun held her hands before her eyes; and old Suddhoo,
fingering at the dirt that had got into his white beard, was crying to
himself. The horror of it was that the creeping, crawly thing made no sound--
only crawled! And, remember, this lasted for ten minutes, while the terrier
whined, and Azizun shuddered, and Janoo gasped, and Suddhoo cried.

I felt the hair lift at the back of my head, and my heart thump like a
thermantidote paddle. Luckily, the seal-cutter betrayed himself by his most
impressive trick and made me calm again. After he had finished that
unspeakable triple crawl, he stretched his head away from the floor as high as
he could, and sent out a jet of fire from his nostrils. Now, I knew how fire-
spouting is done--I can do it myself--so I felt at ease. The business was a
fraud. If he had only kept to that crawl without trying to raise the effect,
goodness knows what I might not have thought. Both the girls shrieked at the
jet of fire and the head dropped, chin down, on the floor with a thud; the
whole body lying then like a corpse with its arms trussed.

There was a pause of five full minutes after this, and the blue-green flame
died down. Janoo stooped to settle one of her anklets, while Azizun turned her
face to the wall and took the terrier in her arms. Suddhoo put out an arm
mechanically to Janoo's huqa, and she slid it across the floor with her foot.
Directly above the body and on the wall, were a couple of flaming portraits,
in stamped paper frames, of the Queen and the Prince of Wales. They looked
down on the performance, and, to my thinking, seemed to heighten the
grotesqueness of it all.

Just when the silence was getting unendurable, the body turned over and rolled
away from the basin to the side of the room, where it lay stomach up. There
was a faint "plop" from the basin--exactly like the noise a fish makes when it
takes a fly--and the green light in the centre revived.

I looked at the basin, and saw, bobbing in the water, the dried, shrivelled,
black head of a native baby--open eyes, open mouth and shaved scalp. It was
worse, being so very sudden, than the crawling exhibition. We had no time to
say anything before it began to speak.

Read Poe's account of the voice that came from the mesmerized dying man, and
you will realize less than one-half of the horror of that head's voice.

There was an interval of a second or two between each word, and a sort of
"ring, ring, ring," in the note of the voice, like the timbre of a bell. It
pealed slowly, as if talking to itself, for several minutes before I got rid
of my cold sweat. Then the blessed solution struck me. I looked at the body
lying near the doorway, and saw, just where the hollow of the throat joins on
the shoulders, a muscle that had nothing to do with any man's regular
breathing, twitching away steadily. The whole thing was a careful reproduction
of the Egyptian teraphin that one read about sometimes and the voice was as
clever and as appalling a piece of ventriloquism as one could wish to hear.
All this time the head was "lip-lip-lapping" against the side of the basin,
and speaking. It told Suddhoo, on his face again whining, of his son's illness
and of the state of the illness up to the evening of that very night. I always
shall respect the seal-cutter for keeping so faithfully to the time of the
Peshawar telegrams. It went on to say that skilled doctors were night and day
watching over the man's life; and that he would eventually recover if the fee
to the potent sorcerer, whose servant was the head in the basin, were doubled.

Here the mistake from the artistic point of view came in. To ask for twice
your stipulated fee in a voice that Lazarus might have used when he rose from
the dead, is absurd. Janoo, who is really a woman of masculine intellect, saw
this as quickly as I did. I heard her say "Asli nahin! Fareib!" scornfully
under her breath; and just as she said so, the light in the basin died out,
the head stopped talking, and we heard the room door creak on its hinges. Then
Janoo struck a match, lit the lamp, and we saw that head, basin, and seal-
cutter were gone. Suddhoo was wringing his hands and explaining to any one who
cared to listen, that, if his chances of eternal salvation depended on it, he
could not raise another two hundred rupees. Azizun was nearly in hysterics in
the corner; while Janoo sat down composedly on one of the beds to discuss the
probabilities of the whole thing being a bunao, or "make-up."

I explained as much as I knew of the seal-cutter's way of jadoo; but her
argument was much more simple:--"The magic that is always demanding gifts is
no true magic," said she. "My mother told me that the only potent love-spells
are those which are told you for love. This seal-cutter man is a liar and a
devil. I dare not tell, do anything, or get anything done, because I am in
debt to Bhagwan Dass the bunnia for two gold rings and a heavy anklet. I must
get my food from his shop. The seal-cutter is the friend of Bhagwan Dass, and
he would poison my food. A fool's jadoo has been going on for ten days, and
has cost Suddhoo many rupees each night. The seal-cutter used black hens and
lemons and mantras before. He never showed us anything like this till tonight.
Azizun is a fool, and will be a purdah nashin soon. Suddhoo has lost his
strength and his wits. See now! I had hoped to get from Suddhoo many rupees
while he lived, and many more after his death; and behold, he is spending
everything on that offspring of a devil and a she-ass, the seal- cutter!"

Here I said:--"But what induced Suddhoo to drag me into the business? Of
course I can speak to the seal-cutter, and he shall refund. The whole thing is
child's talk--shame--and senseless."

"Suddhoo IS an old child," said Janoo. "He has lived on the roofs these
seventy years and is as senseless as a milch-goat. He brought you here to
assure himself that he was not breaking any law of the Sirkar, whose salt he
ate many years ago. He worships the dust off the feet of the seal-cutter, and
that cow-devourer has forbidden him to go and see his son. What does Suddhoo
know of your laws or the lightning-post? I have to watch his money going day
by day to that lying beast below."

Janoo stamped her foot on the floor and nearly cried with vexation; while
Suddhoo was whimpering under a blanket in the corner, and Azizun was trying to
guide the pipe-stem to his foolish old mouth.
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

Now the case stands thus. Unthinkingly, I have laid myself open to the charge
of aiding and abetting the seal-cutter in obtaining money under false
pretences, which is forbidden by Section 420 of the Indian Penal Code. I am
helpless in the matter for these reasons, I cannot inform the Police. What
witnesses would support my statements? Janoo refuses flatly, Azizun is a
veiled woman somewhere near Bareilly--lost in this big India of ours. I cannot
again take the law into my own hands, and speak to the seal-cutter; for
certain am I that, not only would Suddhoo disbelieve me, but this step would
end in the poisoning of Janoo, who is bound hand and foot by her debt to the
bunnia. Suddhoo is an old dotard; and whenever we meet mumbles my idiotic joke
that the Sirkar rather patronizes the Black Art than otherwise. His son is
well now; but Suddhoo is completely under the influence of the seal-cutter, by
whose advice he regulates the affairs of his life. Janoo watches daily the
money that she hoped to wheedle out of Suddhoo taken by the seal-cutter, and
becomes daily more furious and sullen.

She will never tell, because she dare not; but, unless something happens to
prevent her, I am afraid that the seal-cutter will die of cholera--the white
arsenic kind--about the middle of May. And thus I shall have to be privy to a
murder in the House of Suddhoo.



HIS WEDDED WIFE.

Cry "Murder!" in the market-place, and each
Will turn upon his neighbor anxious eyes
That ask:--"Art thou the man?"
We hunted Cain,
Some centuries ago, across the world,
That bred the fear our own misdeeds maintain
Today.
           --Vibart's Moralities.

Shakespeare says something about worms, or it may be giants or beetles,
turning if you tread on them too severely. The safest plan is never to tread
on a worm--not even on the last new subaltern from Home, with his buttons
hardly out of their tissue paper, and the red of sappy English beef in his
cheeks. This is the story of the worm that turned. For the sake of brevity, we
will call Henry Augustus Ramsay Faizanne, "The Worm," although he really was
an exceedingly pretty boy, without a hair on his face, and with a waist like a
girl's when he came out to the Second "Shikarris" and was made unhappy in
several ways. The "Shikarris" are a high-caste regiment, and you must be able
to do things well--play a banjo or ride more than a little, or sing, or act--
to get on with them.

The Worm did nothing except fall off his pony, and knock chips out of gate-
posts with his trap. Even that became monotonous after a time. He objected to
whist, cut the cloth at billiards, sang out of tune, kept very much to
himself, and wrote to his Mamma and sisters at Home. Four of these five things
were vices which the "Shikarris" objected to and set themselves to eradicate.
Every one knows how subalterns are, by brother subalterns, softened and not
permitted to be ferocious. It is good and wholesome, and does no one any harm,
unless tempers are lost; and then there is trouble. There was a man once--but
that is another story.

The "Shikarris" shikarred The Worm very much, and he bore everything without
winking. He was so good and so anxious to learn, and flushed so pink, that his
education was cut short, and he was left to his own devices by every one
except the Senior Subaltern, who continued to make life a burden to The Worm.
The Senior Subaltern meant no harm; but his chaff was coarse, and he didn't
quite understand where to stop. He had been waiting too long for his company;
and that always sours a man. Also he was in love, which made him worse.

One day, after he had borrowed The Worm's trap for a lady who never existed,
had used it himself all the afternoon, had sent a note to The Worm purporting
to come from the lady, and was telling the Mess all about it, The Worm rose in
his place and said, in his quiet, ladylike voice: "That was a very pretty
sell; but I'll lay you a month's pay to a month's pay when you get your step,
that I work a sell on you that you'll remember for the rest of your days, and
the Regiment after you when you're dead or broke." The Worm wasn't angry in
the least, and the rest of the Mess shouted. Then the Senior Subaltern looked
at The Worm from the boots upwards, and down again, and said, "Done, Baby."
The Worm took the rest of the Mess to witness that the bet had been taken, and
retired into a book with a sweet smile.

Two months passed, and the Senior Subaltern still educated The Worm, who began
to move about a little more as the hot weather came on. I have said that the
Senior Subaltern was in love. The curious thing is that a girl was in love
with the Senior Subaltern. Though the Colonel said awful things, and the
Majors snorted, and married Captains looked unutterable wisdom, and the
juniors scoffed, those two were engaged.

The Senior Subaltern was so pleased with getting his Company and his
acceptance at the same time that he forgot to bother The Worm. The girl was a
pretty girl, and had money of her own. She does not come into this story at
all.

One night, at the beginning of the hot weather, all the Mess, except The Worm,
who had gone to his own room to write Home letters, were sitting on the
platform outside the Mess House. The Band had finished playing, but no one
wanted to go in. And the Captains' wives were there also. The folly of a man
in love is unlimited.

The Senior Subaltern had been holding forth on the merits of the girl he was
engaged to, and the ladies were purring approval, while the men yawned, when
there was a rustle of skirts in the dark, and a tired, faint voice lifted
itself:

"Where's my husband?"

I do not wish in the least to reflect on the morality of the "Shikarris;" but
it is on record that four men jumped up as if they had been shot. Three of
them were married men. Perhaps they were afraid that their wives had come from
Home unbeknownst. The fourth said that he had acted on the impulse of the
moment. He explained this afterwards.

Then the voice cried:--"Oh, Lionel!" Lionel was the Senior Subaltern's name. A
woman came into the little circle of light by the candles on the peg-tables,
stretching out her hands to the dark where the Senior Subaltern was, and
sobbing. We rose to our feet, feeling that things were going to happen and
ready to believe the worst. In this bad, small world of ours, one knows so
little of the life of the next man--which, after all, is entirely his own
concern--that one is not surprised when a crash comes. Anything might turn up
any day for any one. Perhaps the Senior Subaltern had been trapped in his
youth. Men are crippled that way occasionally. We didn't know; we wanted to
hear; and the Captains' wives were as anxious as we. If he HAD been trapped,
he was to be excused; for the woman from nowhere, in the dusty shoes, and gray
travelling dress, was very lovely, with black hair and great eyes full of
tears. She was tall, with a fine figure, and her voice had a running sob in it
pitiful to hear. As soon as the Senior Subaltern stood up, she threw her arms
round his neck, and called him "my darling," and said she could not bear
waiting alone in England, and his letters were so short and cold, and she was
his to the end of the world, and would he forgive her. This did not sound
quite like a lady's way of speaking. It was too demonstrative.

Things seemed black indeed, and the Captains' wives peered under their
eyebrows at the Senior Subaltern, and the Colonel's face set like the Day of
Judgment framed in gray bristles, and no one spoke for a while.

Next the Colonel said, very shortly:--"Well, Sir?" and the woman sobbed
afresh. The Senior Subaltern was half choked with the arms round his neck, but
he gasped out:--"It's a d----d lie! I never had a wife in my life!" "Don't
swear," said the Colonel. "Come into the Mess. We must sift this clear
somehow," and he sighed to himself, for he believed in his "Shikarris," did
the Colonel.

We trooped into the ante-room, under the full lights, and there we saw how
beautiful the woman was. She stood up in the middle of us all, sometimes
choking with crying, then hard and proud, and then holding out her arms to the
Senior Subaltern. It was like the fourth act of a tragedy. She told us how the
Senior Subaltern had married her when he was Home on leave eighteen months
before; and she seemed to know all that we knew, and more too, of his people
and his past life. He was white and ashy gray, trying now and again to break
into the torrent of her words; and we, noting how lovely she was and what a
criminal he looked, esteemed him a beast of the worst kind. We felt sorry for
him, though.

I shall never forget the indictment of the Senior Subaltern by his wife. Nor
will he. It was so sudden, rushing out of the dark, unannounced, into our dull
lives. The Captains' wives stood back; but their eyes were alight, and you
could see that they had already convicted and sentenced the Senior Subaltern.
The Colonel seemed five years older. One Major was shading his eyes with his
hand and watching the woman from underneath it. Another was chewing his
moustache and smiling quietly as if he were witnessing a play. Full in the
open space in the centre, by the whist-tables, the Senior Subaltern's terrier
was hunting for fleas. I remember all this as clearly as though a photograph
were in my hand. I remember the look of horror on the Senior Subaltern's face.
It was rather like seeing a man hanged; but much more interesting. Finally,
the woman wound up by saying that the Senior Subaltern carried a double F. M.
in tattoo on his left shoulder. We all knew that, and to our innocent minds it
seemed to clinch the matter. But one of the Bachelor Majors said very
politely:--"I presume that your marriage certificate would be more to the
purpose?"

That roused the woman. She stood up and sneered at the Senior Subaltern for a
cur, and abused the Major and the Colonel and all the rest. Then she wept, and
then she pulled a paper from her breast, saying imperially:--"Take that! And
let my husband--my lawfully wedded husband--read it aloud--if he dare!"

There was a hush, and the men looked into each other's eyes as the Senior
Subaltern came forward in a dazed and dizzy way, and took the paper. We were
wondering as we stared, whether there was anything against any one of us that
might turn up later on. The Senior Subaltern's throat was dry; but, as he ran
his eye over the paper, he broke out into a hoarse cackle of relief, and said
to the woman:--"You young blackguard!"

But the woman had fled through a door, and on the paper was written:--"This is
to certify that I, The Worm, have paid in full my debts to the Senior
Subaltern, and, further, that the Senior Subaltern is my debtor, by agreement
on the 23d of February, as by the Mess attested, to the extent of one month's
Captain's pay, in the lawful currency of the India Empire."
                                                            
Then a deputation set off for The Worm's quarters and found him, betwixt and
between, unlacing his stays, with the hat, wig, serge dress, etc., on the bed.
He came over as he was, and the "Shikarris" shouted till the Gunners' Mess
sent over to know if they might have a share of the fun. I think we were all,
except the Colonel and the Senior Subaltern, a little disappointed that the
scandal had come to nothing. But that is human nature. There could be no two
words about The Worm's acting. It leaned as near to a nasty tragedy as
anything this side of a joke can. When most of the Subalterns sat upon him
with sofa-cushions to find out why he had not said that acting was his strong
point, he answered very quietly:--"I don't think you ever asked me. I used to
act at Home with my sisters." But no acting with girls could account for The
Worm's display that night. Personally, I think it was in bad taste.

Besides being dangerous. There is no sort of use in playing with fire, even
for fun.

The "Shikarris" made him President of the Regimental Dramatic Club; and, when
the Senior Subaltern paid up his debt, which he did at once, The Worm sank the
money in scenery and dresses. He was a good Worm; and the "Shikarris" are
proud of him. The only drawback is that he has been christened "Mrs. Senior
Subaltern;" and as there are now two Mrs. Senior Subalterns in the Station,
this is sometimes confusing to strangers.

Later on, I will tell you of a case something like, this, but with all the
jest left out and nothing in it but real trouble.



THE BROKEN LINK HANDICAPPED.

While the snaffle holds, or the "long-neck" stings,
While the big beam tilts, or the last bell rings,
While horses are horses to train and to race,
Then women and wine take a second place
    For me--for me--
     While a short "ten-three"
Has a field to squander or fence to face!
               ----Song of the G. R.

There are more ways of running a horse to suit your book than pulling his head
off in the straight. Some men forget this.

Understand clearly that all racing is rotten--as everything connected with
losing money must be. Out here, in addition to its inherent rottenness, it has
the merit of being two-thirds sham; looking pretty on paper only. Every one
knows every one else far too well for business purposes. How on earth can you
rack and harry and post a man for his losings, when you are fond of his wife,
and live in the same Station with him? He says, "on the Monday following," "I
can't settle just yet." "You say, "All right, old man," and think your self
lucky if you pull off nine hundred out of a two-thousand rupee debt. Any way
you look at it, Indian racing is immoral, and expensively immoral. Which is
much worse. If a man wants your money, he ought to ask for it, or send round a
subscription-list, instead of juggling about the country, with an Australian
larrikin; a "brumby," with as much breed as the boy; a brace of chumars in
gold-laced caps; three or four ekka-ponies with hogged manes, and a switch-
tailed demirep of a mare called Arab because she has a kink in her flag.
Racing leads to the shroff quicker than anything else. But if you have no
conscience and no sentiments, and good hands, and some knowledge of pace, and
ten years' experience of horses, and several thousand rupees a month, I
believe that you can occasionally contrive to pay your shoeing- bills.

Did you ever know Shackles--b. w. g., 15.13.8--coarse, loose, mule-like ears--
barrel as long as a gate-post--tough as a telegraph-wire--and the queerest
brute that ever looked through a bridle? He was of no brand, being one of an
ear-nicked mob taken into the Bucephalus at 4l.-10s. a head to make up
freight, and sold raw and out of condition at Calcutta for Rs. 275. People who
lost money on him called him a "brumby;" but if ever any horse had Harpoon's
shoulders and The Gin's temper, Shackles was that horse. Two miles was his own
particular distance. He trained himself, ran himself, and rode himself; and,
if his jockey insulted him by giving him hints, he shut up at once and bucked
the boy off. He objected to dictation. Two or three of his owners did not
understand this, and lost money in consequence. At last he was bought by a man
who discovered that, if a race was to be won, Shackles, and Shackles only,
would win it in his own way, so long as his jockey sat still.

This man had a riding-boy called Brunt--a lad from Perth, West Australia--and
he taught Brunt, with a trainer's whip, the hardest thing a jock can learn--to
sit still, to sit still, and to keep on sitting still. When Brunt fairly
grasped this truth, Shackles devastated the country. No weight could stop him
at his own distance; and The fame of Shackles spread from Ajmir in the South,
to Chedputter in the North. There was no horse like Shackles, so long as he
was allowed to do his work in his own way. But he was beaten in the end; and
the story of his fall is enough to make angels weep.

At the lower end of the Chedputter racecourse, just before the turn into the
straight, the track passes close to a couple of old brick- mounds enclosing a
funnel-shaped hollow. The big end of the funnel is not six feet from the
railings on the off-side. The astounding peculiarity of the course is that, if
you stand at one particular place, about half a mile away, inside the course,
and speak at an ordinary pitch, your voice just hits the funnel of the brick-
mounds and makes a curious whining echo there. A man discovered this one
morning by accident while out training with a friend. He marked the place to
stand and speak from with a couple of bricks, and he kept his knowledge to
himself. EVERY peculiarity of a course is worth remembering in a country where
rats play the mischief with the elephant-litter, and Stewards build jumps to
suit their own stables.

This man ran a very fairish country-bred, a long, racking high mare with the
temper of a fiend, and the paces of an airy wandering seraph--a drifty, glidy
stretch. The mare was, as a delicate tribute to Mrs. Reiver, called "The Lady
Regula Baddun"--or for short, Regula Baddun.

Shackles' jockey, Brunt, was a quiet, well-behaved boy, but his nerves had
been shaken. He began his career by riding jump-races in Melbourne, where a
few Stewards want lynching, and was one of the jockeys who came through the
awful butchery--perhaps you will recollect it--of the Maribyrnong Plate. The
walls were colonial ramparts--logs of jarrak spiked into masonry--with wings
as strong as Church buttresses. Once in his stride, a horse had to jump or
fall. He couldn't run out. In the Maribyrnong Plate, twelve horses were jammed
at the second wall. Red Hat, leading, fell this side, and threw out The Glen,
and the ruck came up behind and the space between wing and wing was one
struggling, screaming, kicking shambles. Four jockeys were taken out dead;
three were very badly hurt, and Brunt was among the three. He told the story
of the Maribyrnong Plate sometimes; and when he described how Whalley on Red
Hat, said, as the mare fell under him:--"God ha' mercy, I'm done for!" and
how, next instant, Sithee There and White Otter had crushed the life out of
poor Whalley, and the dust hid a small hell of men and horses, no one
marvelled that Brunt had dropped jump-races and Australia together. Regula
Baddun's owner knew that story by heart. Brunt never varied it in the telling.
He had no education.

Shackles came to the Chedputter Autumn races one year, and his owner walked
about insulting the sportsmen of Chedputter generally, till they went to the
Honorary Secretary in a body and said:--"Appoint Handicappers, and arrange a
race which shall break Shackles and humble the pride of his owner." The
Districts rose against Shackles and sent up of their best; Ousel, who was
supposed to be able to do his mile in 1-53; Petard, the stud-bred, trained by
a cavalry regiment who knew how to train; Gringalet, the ewe-lamb of the 75th;
Bobolink, the pride of Peshawar; and many others.

They called that race The Broken-Link Handicap, because it was to smash
Shackles; and the Handicappers piled on the weights, and the Fund gave eight
hundred rupees, and the distance was "round the course for all horses."
Shackles' owner said:--"You can arrange the race with regard to Shackles only.
So long as you don't bury him under weight-cloths, I don't mind. Regula
Baddun's owner said:--"I throw in my mare to fret Ousel. Six furlongs is
Regula's distance, and she will then lie down and die. So also will Ousel, for
his jockey doesn't understand a waiting race." Now, this was a lie, for Regula
had been in work for two months at Dehra, and her chances were good, always
supposing that Shackles broke a blood-vessel--OR BRUNT MOVED ON HIM.

The plunging in the lotteries was fine. They filled eight thousand rupee
lotteries on the Broken Link Handicap, and the account in the Pioneer said
that "favoritism was divided." In plain English, the various contingents were
wild on their respective horses; for the Handicappers had done their work
well. The Honorary Secretary shouted himself hoarse through the din; and the
smoke of the cheroots was like the smoke, and the rattling of the dice-boxes
like the rattle of small-arm fire.

Ten horses started--very level--and Regula Baddun's owner cantered out on his
back to a place inside the circle of the course, where two bricks had been
thrown. He faced towards the brick-mounds at the lower end of the course and
waited.

 The story of the running is in the Pioneer. At the end of the first mile,
Shackles crept out of the ruck, well on the outside, ready to get round the
turn, lay hold of the bit and spin up the straight before the others knew he
had got away. Brunt was sitting still, perfectly happy, listening to the
"drum, drum, drum" of the hoofs behind, and knowing that, in about twenty
strides, Shackles would draw one deep breath and go up the last half-mile like
the "Flying Dutchman." As Shackles went short to take the turn and came
abreast of the brick-mound, Brunt heard, above the noise of the wind in his
ears, a whining, wailing voice on the offside, saying:--"God ha' mercy, I'm
done for!" In one stride, Brunt saw the whole seething smash of the
Maribyrnong Plate before him, started in his saddle and gave a yell of terror.
The start brought the heels into Shackles' side, and the scream hurt Shackles'
feelings. He couldn't stop dead; but he put out his feet and slid along for
fifty yards, and then, very gravely and judicially, bucked off Brunt--a
shaking, terror-stricken lump, while Regula Baddun made a neck-and-neck race
with Bobolink up the straight, and won by a short head--Petard a bad third.
Shackles' owner, in the Stand, tried to think that his field-glasses had gone
wrong. Regula Baddun's owner, waiting by the two bricks, gave one deep sigh of
relief, and cantered back to the stand. He had won, in lotteries and bets,
about fifteen thousand.

It was a broken-link Handicap with a vengeance. It broke nearly all the men
concerned, and nearly broke the heart of Shackles' owner.

He went down to interview Brunt. The boy lay, livid and gasping with fright,
where he had tumbled off. The sin of losing the race never seemed to strike
him. All he knew was that Whalley had "called" him, that the "call" was a
warning; and, were he cut in two for it, he would never get up again. His
nerve had gone altogether, and he only asked his master to give him a good
thrashing, and let him go. He was fit for nothing, he said. He got his
dismissal, and crept up to the paddock, white as chalk, with blue lips, his
knees giving way under him. People said nasty things in the paddock; but Brunt
never heeded. He changed into tweeds, took his stick and went down the road,
still shaking with fright, and muttering over and over again:--"God ha' mercy,
I'm done for!" To the best of my knowledge and belief he spoke the truth.

So now you know how the Broken-Link Handicap was run and won. Of course you
don't believe it. You would credit anything about Russia's designs on India,
or the recommendations of the Currency Commission; but a little bit of sober
fact is more than you can stand!



BEYOND THE PALE.

"Love heeds not caste nor sleep a broken bed. I went in search of love and
lost myself." Hindu Proverb.

A man should, whatever happens, keep to his own caste, race and breed. Let the
White go to the White and the Black to the Black.

Then, whatever trouble falls is in the ordinary course of things--neither
sudden, alien, nor unexpected.

This is the story of a man who wilfully stepped beyond the safe limits of
decent every-day society, and paid for it heavily.

He knew too much in the first instance; and he saw too much in the second. He
took too deep an interest in native life; but he will never do so again.

Deep away in the heart of the City, behind Jitha Megji's bustee, lies Amir
Nath's Gully, which ends in a dead-wall pierced by one grated window. At the
head of the Gully is a big cow-byre, and the walls on either side of the Gully
are without windows. Neither Suchet Singh nor Gaur Chand approved of their
women-folk looking into the world. If Durga Charan had been of their opinion,
he would have been a happier man today, and little Bisesa would have been able
to knead her own bread. Her room looked out through the grated window into the
narrow dark Gully where the sun never came and where the buffaloes wallowed in
the blue slime. She was a widow, about fifteen years old, and she prayed the
Gods, day and night, to send her a lover; for she did not approve of living
alone.

One day the man--Trejago his name was--came into Amir Nath's Gully on an
aimless wandering; and, after he had passed the buffaloes, stumbled over a big
heap of cattle food.

Then he saw that the Gully ended in a trap, and heard a little laugh from
behind the grated window. It was a pretty little laugh, and Trejago, knowing
that, for all practical purposes, the old Arabian Nights are good guides, went
forward to the window, and whispered that verse of "The Love Song of Har Dyal"
which begins:

  Can a man stand upright in the face of the naked Sun;
    or a Lover in the Presence of his Beloved?
  If my feet fail me, O Heart of my Heart, am I to blame,
    being blinded by the glimpse of your beauty?

There came the faint tchinks of a woman's bracelets from behind the grating,
and a little voice went on with the song at the fifth verse:

  Alas! alas! Can the Moon tell the Lotus of her love when the
   Gate of Heaven is shut and the clouds gather for the rains?
  They have taken my Beloved, and driven her with the pack-horses
    to the North.
  There are iron chains on the feet that were set on my heart.
  Call to the bowman to make ready--

The voice stopped suddenly, and Trejago walked out of Amir Nath's Gully,
wondering who in the world could have capped "The Love Song of Har Dyal" so
neatly.

Next morning, as he was driving to the office, an old woman threw a packet
into his dog-cart. In the packet was the half of a broken glass bangle, one
flower of the blood red dhak, a pinch of bhusa or cattle-food, and eleven
cardamoms. That packet was a letter--not a clumsy compromising letter, but an
innocent, unintelligible lover's epistle.

Trejago knew far too much about these things, as I have said. No Englishman
should be able to translate object-letters. But Trejago spread all the trifles
on the lid of his office-box and began to puzzle them out.

A broken glass-bangle stands for a Hindu widow all India over; because, when
her husband dies a woman's bracelets are broken on her wrists. Trejago saw the
meaning of the little bit of the glass.

The flower of the dhak means diversely "desire," "come," "write," or "danger,"
according to the other things with it. One cardamom means "jealousy;" but when
any article is duplicated in an object-letter, it loses its symbolic meaning
and stands merely for one of a number indicating time, or, if incense, curds,
or saffron be sent also, place. The message ran then:--"A widow dhak flower
and bhusa--at eleven o'clock." The pinch of bhusa enlightened Trejago. He saw-
-this kind of letter leaves much to instinctive knowledge--that the bhusa
referred to the big heap of cattle-food over which he had fallen in Amir
Nath's Gully, and that the message must come from the person behind the
grating; she being a widow. So the message ran then:--"A widow, in the Gully
in which is the heap of bhusa, desires you to come at eleven o'clock."

Trejago threw all the rubbish into the fireplace and laughed. He knew that men
in the East do not make love under windows at eleven in the forenoon, nor do
women fix appointments a week in advance.

So he went, that very night at eleven, into Amir Nath's Gully, clad in a
boorka, which cloaks a man as well as a woman. Directly the gongs in the City
made the hour, the little voice behind the grating took up "The Love Song of
Har Dyal" at the verse where the Panthan girl calls upon Har Dyal to return.
The song is really pretty in the Vernacular. In English you miss the wail of
it. It runs something like this:--

    Alone upon the housetops, to the North
     I turn and watch the lightning in the sky,--
    The glamour of thy footsteps in the North,
     Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!

    Below my feet the still bazar is laid
     Far, far below the weary camels lie,--
    The camels and the captives of thy raid,
     Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!

    My father's wife is old and harsh with years,
     And drudge of all my father's house am I.--
    My bread is sorrow and my drink is tears,
     Come back to me, Beloved, or I die!

As the song stopped, Trejago stepped up under the grating and whispered:--"I
am here."

Bisesa was good to look upon.

That night was the beginning of many strange things, and of a double life so
wild that Trejago today sometimes wonders if it were not all a dream. Bisesa
or her old handmaiden who had thrown the object-letter had detached the heavy
grating from the brick-work of the wall; so that the window slid inside,
leaving only a square of raw masonry, into which an active man might climb.

In the day-time, Trejago drove through his routine of office-work, or put on
his calling-clothes and called on the ladies of the Station; wondering how
long they would know him if they knew of poor little Bisesa. At night, when
all the City was still, came the walk under the evil-smelling boorka, the
patrol through Jitha Megji's bustee, the quick turn into Amir Nath's Gully
between the sleeping cattle and the dead walls, and then, last of all, Bisesa,
and the deep, even breathing of the old woman who slept outside the door of
the bare little room that Durga Charan allotted to his sister's daughter. Who
or what Durga Charan was, Trejago never inquired; and why in the world he was
not discovered and knifed never occurred to him till his madness was over, and
Bisesa . . . But this comes later.

Bisesa was an endless delight to Trejago. She was as ignorant as a bird; and
her distorted versions of the rumors from the outside world that had reached
her in her room, amused Trejago almost as much as her lisping attempts to
pronounce his name--"Christopher." The first syllable was always more than she
could manage, and she made funny little gestures with her rose-leaf hands, as
one throwing the name away, and then, kneeling before Trejago, asked him,
exactly as an Englishwoman would do, if he were sure he loved her. Trejago
swore that he loved her more than any one else in the world. Which was true.

After a month of this folly, the exigencies of his other life compelled
Trejago to be especially attentive to a lady of his acquaintance. You may take
it for a fact that anything of this kind is not only noticed and discussed by
a man's own race, but by some hundred and fifty natives as well. Trejago had
to walk with this lady and talk to her at the Band-stand, and once or twice to
drive with her; never for an instant dreaming that this would affect his
dearer out-of-the-way life. But the news flew, in the usual mysterious
fashion, from mouth to mouth, till Bisesa's duenna heard of it and told
Bisesa. The child was so troubled that she did the household work evilly, and
was beaten by Durga Charan's wife in consequence.

A week later, Bisesa taxed Trejago with the flirtation. She understood no
gradations and spoke openly. Trejago laughed and Bisesa stamped her little
feet--little feet, light as marigold flowers, that could lie in the palm of a
man's one hand.

Much that is written about "Oriental passion and impulsiveness" is exaggerated
and compiled at second-hand, but a little of it is true; and when an
Englishman finds that little, it is quite as startling as any passion in his
own proper life. Bisesa raged and stormed, and finally threatened to kill
herself if Trejago did not at once drop the alien Memsahib who had come
between them. Trejago tried to explain, and to show her that she did not
understand these things from a Western standpoint. Bisesa drew herself up, and
said simply:

"I do not. I know only this--it is not good that I should have made you dearer
than my own heart to me, Sahib. You are an Englishman.

I am only a black girl"--she was fairer than bar-gold in the Mint--"and the
widow of a black man."

Then she sobbed and said: "But on my soul and my Mother's soul, I love you.
There shall no harm come to you, whatever happens to me."

Trejago argued with the child, and tried to soothe her, but she seemed quite
unreasonably disturbed. Nothing would satisfy her save that all relations
between them should end. He was to go away at once. And he went. As he dropped
out at the window, she kissed his forehead twice, and he walked away
wondering.

A week, and then three weeks, passed without a sign from Bisesa.

Trejago, thinking that the rupture had lasted quite long enough, went down to
Amir Nath's Gully for the fifth time in the three weeks, hoping that his rap
at the sill of the shifting grating would be answered. He was not
disappointed.

There was a young moon, and one stream of light fell down into Amir Nath's
Gully, and struck the grating, which was drawn away as he knocked. From the
black dark, Bisesa held out her arms into the moonlight. Both hands had been
cut off at the wrists, and the stumps were nearly healed.

Then, as Bisesa bowed her head between her arms and sobbed, some one in the
room grunted like a wild beast, and something sharp--knife, sword or spear--
thrust at Trejago in his boorka. The stroke missed his body, but cut into one
of the muscles of the groin, and he limped slightly from the wound for the
rest of his days.

The grating went into its place. There was no sign whatever from inside the
house--nothing but the moonlight strip on the high wall, and the blackness of
Amir Nath's Gully behind.

The next thing Trejago remembers, after raging and shouting like a madman
between those pitiless walls, is that he found himself near the river as the
dawn was breaking, threw away his boorka and went home bareheaded.

What the tragedy was--whether Bisesa had, in a fit of causeless despair, told
everything, or the intrigue had been discovered and she tortured to tell,
whether Durga Charan knew his name, and what became of Bisesa--Trejago does
not know to this day. Something horrible had happened, and the thought of what
it must have been comes upon Trejago in the night now and again, and keeps him
company till the morning. One special feature of the case is that he does not
know where lies the front of Durga Charan's house. It may open on to a
courtyard common to two or more houses, or it may lie behind any one of the
gates of Jitha Megji's bustee. Trejago cannot tell.

He cannot get Bisesa--poor little Bisesa--back again. He has lost her in the
City, where each man's house is as guarded and as unknowable as the grave; and
the grating that opens into Amir Nath's Gully has been walled up.

But Trejago pays his calls regularly, and is reckoned a very decent sort of
man.

There is nothing peculiar about him, except a slight stiffness, caused by a
riding-strain, in the right leg.



 IN ERROR.

 They burnt a corpse upon the sand--
   The light shone out afar;
 It guided home the plunging boats
   That beat from Zanzibar.

 Spirit of Fire, where'er Thy altars rise.
 Thou art Light of Guidance to our eyes!
            ----Salsette Boat-Song.

There is hope for a man who gets publicly and riotously drunk more often that
he ought to do; but there is no hope for the man who drinks secretly and alone
in his own house--the man who is never seen to drink.

This is a rule; so there must be an exception to prove it.

Moriarty's case was that exception.

He was a Civil Engineer, and the Government, very kindly, put him quite by
himself in an out-district, with nobody but natives to talk to and a great
deal of work to do. He did his work well in the four years he was utterly
alone; but he picked up the vice of secret and solitary drinking, and came up
out of the wilderness more old and worn and haggard than the dead-alive life
had any right to make him.

You know the saying that a man who has been alone in the jungle for more than
a year is never quite sane all his life after. People credited Moriarty's
queerness of manner and moody ways to the solitude, and said it showed how
Government spoilt the futures of its best men. Moriarty had built himself the
plinth of a very god reputation in the bridge-dam-girder line. But he knew,
every night of the week, that he was taking steps to undermine that reputation
with L. L. L. and "Christopher" and little nips of liqueurs, and filth of that
kind. He had a sound constitution and a great brain, or else he would have
broken down and died like a sick camel in the district, as better men have
done before him.

Government ordered him to Simla after he had come out of the desert; and he
went up meaning to try for a post then vacant. That season, Mrs. Reiver--
perhaps you will remember her--was in the height of her power, and many men
lay under her yoke. Everything bad that could be said has already been said
about Mrs. Reiver, in another tale.

Moriarty was heavily-built and handsome, very quiet and nervously anxious to
please his neighbors when he wasn't sunk in a brown study. He started a good
deal at sudden noises or if spoken to without warning; and, when you watched
him drinking his glass of water at dinner, you could see the hand shake a
little. But all this was put down to nervousness, and the quiet, steady, "sip-
sip-sip, fill and sip-sip-sip, again," that went on in his own room when he
was by himself, was never known. Which was miraculous, seeing how everything
in a man's private life is public property out here.

Moriarty was drawn, not into Mrs. Reiver's set, because they were not his
sort, but into the power of Mrs. Reiver, and he fell down in front of her and
made a goddess of her. This was due to his coming fresh out of the jungle to a
big town. He could not scale things properly or see who was what.

Because Mrs. Reiver was cold and hard, he said she was stately and dignified.
Because she had no brains, and could not talk cleverly, he said she was
reserved and shy. Mrs. Reiver shy! Because she was unworthy of honor or
reverence from any one, he reverenced her from a distance and dowered her with
all the virtues in the Bible and most of those in Shakespeare.

This big, dark, abstracted man who was so nervous when a pony cantered behind
him, used to moon in the train of Mrs. Reiver, blushing with pleasure when she
threw a word or two his way. His admiration was strictly platonic: even other
women saw and admitted this. He did not move out in Simla, so he heard nothing
against his idol: which was satisfactory. Mrs. Reiver took no special notice
of him, beyond seeing that he was added to her list of admirers, and going for
a walk with him now and then, just to show that he was her property, claimable
as such. Moriarty must have done most of the talking, for Mrs. Reiver couldn't
talk much to a man of his stamp; and the little she said could not have been
profitable. What Moriarty believed in, as he had good reason to, was Mrs.
Reiver's influence over him, and, in that belief, set himself seriously to try
to do away with the vice that only he himself knew of.

His experiences while he was fighting with it must have been peculiar, but he
never described them. Sometimes he would hold off from everything except water
for a week. Then, on a rainy night, when no one had asked him out to dinner,
and there was a big fire in his room, and everything comfortable, he would sit
down and make a big night of it by adding little nip to little nip, planning
big schemes of reformation meanwhile, until he threw himself on his bed
hopelessly drunk. He suffered next morning.

One night, the big crash came. He was troubled in his own mind over his
attempts to make himself "worthy of the friendship" of Mrs. Reiver. The past
ten days had been very bad ones, and the end of it all was that he received
the arrears of two and three-quarter years of sipping in one attack of
delirium tremens of the subdued kind; beginning with suicidal depression,
going on to fits and starts and hysteria, and ending with downright raving. As
he sat in a chair in front of the fire, or walked up and down the room picking
a handkerchief to pieces, you heard what poor Moriarty really thought of Mrs.
Reiver, for he raved about her and his own fall for the most part; though he
ravelled some P. W. D. accounts into the same skein of thought. He talked, and
talked, and talked in a low dry whisper to himself, and there was no stopping
him. He seemed to know that there was something wrong, and twice tried to pull
himself together and confer rationally with the Doctor; but his mind ran out
of control at once, and he fell back to a whisper and the story of his
troubles. It is terrible to hear a big man babbling like a child of all that a
man usually locks up, and puts away in the deep of his heart. Moriarty read
out his very soul for the benefit of any one who was in the room between ten-
thirty that night and two-forty-five next morning.

From what he said, one gathered how immense an influence Mrs. Reiver held over
him, and how thoroughly he felt for his own lapse. His whisperings cannot, of
course, be put down here; but they were very instructive as showing the errors
of his estimates.
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

When the trouble was over, and his few acquaintances were pitying him for the
bad attack of jungle-fever that had so pulled him down, Moriarty swore a big
oath to himself and went abroad again with Mrs. Reiver till the end of the
season, adoring her in a quiet and deferential way as an angel from heaven.
Later on he took to riding--not hacking, but honest riding--which was good
proof that he was improving, and you could slam doors behind him without his
jumping to his feet with a gasp. That, again, was hopeful.

How he kept his oath, and what it cost him in the beginning, nobody knows. He
certainly managed to compass the hardest thing that a man who has drank
heavily can do. He took his peg and wine at dinner, but he never drank alone,
and never let what he drank have the least hold on him.

Once he told a bosom-friend the story of his great trouble, and how the
"influence of a pure honest woman, and an angel as well" had saved him. When
the man--startled at anything good being laid to Mrs. Reiver's door--laughed,
it cost him Moriarty's friendship.

Moriarty, who is married now to a woman ten thousand times better than Mrs.
Reiver--a woman who believes that there is no man on earth as good and clever
as her husband--will go down to his grave vowing and protesting that Mrs.
Reiver saved him from ruin in both worlds.

That she knew anything of Moriarty's weakness nobody believed for a moment.
That she would have cut him dead, thrown him over, and acquainted all her
friends with her discovery, if she had known of it, nobody who knew her
doubted for an instant.

 Moriarty thought her something she never was, and in that belief saved
himself. Which was just as good as though she had been everything that he had
imagined.

But the question is, what claim will Mrs. Reiver have to the credit of
Moriarty's salvation, when her day of reckoning comes?



A BANK FRAUD.

He drank strong waters and his speech was coarse;
  He purchased raiment and forebore to pay;
He struck a trusting junior with a horse,
  And won Gymkhanas in a doubtful way.

Then, 'twixt a vice and folly, turned aside
  To do good deeds and straight to cloak them, lied.
          --THE MESS ROOM.

 If Reggie Burke were in India now, he would resent this tale being told; but
as he is in Hong-Kong and won't see it, the telling is safe. He was the man
who worked the big fraud on the Sind and Sialkote Bank. He was manager of an
up-country Branch, and a sound practical man with a large experience of native
loan and insurance work. He could combine the frivolities of ordinary life
with his work, and yet do well. Reggie Burke rode anything that would let him
get up, danced as neatly as he rode, and was wanted for every sort of
amusement in the Station.

 As he said himself, and as many men found out rather to their surprise, there
were two Burkes, both very much at your service.

 "Reggie Burke," between four and ten, ready for anything from a hot-weather
gymkhana to a riding-picnic; and, between ten and four, "Mr.  Reginald Burke,
Manager of the Sind and Sialkote Branch Bank." You might play polo with him
one afternoon and hear him express his opinions when a man crossed; and you
might call on him next morning to raise a two-thousand rupee loan on a five
hundred pound insurance-policy, eighty pounds paid in premiums. He would
recognize you, but you would have some trouble in recognizing him.

The Directors of the Bank--it had its headquarters in Calcutta and its General
Manager's word carried weight with the Government--picked their men well. They
had tested Reggie up to a fairly severe breaking-strain. They trusted him just
as much as Directors ever trust Managers. You must see for yourself whether
their trust was misplaced.

Reggie's Branch was in a big Station, and worked with the usual staff--one
Manager, one Accountant, both English, a Cashier, and a horde of native
clerks; besides the Police patrol at nights outside.

The bulk of its work, for it was in a thriving district, was hoondi and
accommodation of all kinds. A fool has no grip of this sort of business; and a
clever man who does not go about among his clients, and know more than a
little of their affairs, is worse than a fool.

Reggie was young-looking, clean-shaved, with a twinkle in his eye, and a head
that nothing short of a gallon of the Gunners' Madeira could make any
impression on.

One day, at a big dinner, he announced casually that the Directors had shifted
on to him a Natural Curiosity, from England, in the Accountant line. He was
perfectly correct. Mr. Silas Riley, Accountant, was a MOST curious animal--a
long, gawky, rawboned Yorkshireman, full of the savage self-conceit that
blossoms only in the best county in England. Arrogance was a mild word for the
mental attitude of Mr. S. Riley. He had worked himself up, after seven years,
to a Cashier's position in a Huddersfield Bank; and all his experience lay
among the factories of the North. Perhaps he would have done better on the
Bombay side, where they are happy with one-half per cent. profits, and money
is cheap. He was useless for Upper India and a wheat Province, where a man
wants a large head and a touch of imagination if he is to turn out a
satisfactory balance-sheet.

He was wonderfully narrow-minded in business, and, being new to the country,
had no notion that Indian banking is totally distinct from Home work. Like
most clever self-made men, he had much simplicity in his nature; and, somehow
or other, had construed the ordinarily polite terms of his letter of
engagement into a belief that the Directors had chosen him on account of his
special and brilliant talents, and that they set great store by him. This
notion grew and crystallized; thus adding to his natural North-country
conceit.

Further, he was delicate, suffered from some trouble in his chest, and was
short in his temper.

You will admit that Reggie had reason to call his new Accountant a Natural
Curiosity. The two men failed to hit it off at all. Riley considered Reggie a
wild, feather-headed idiot, given to Heaven only knew what dissipation in low
places called "Messes," and totally unfit for the serious and solemn vocation
of banking. He could never get over Reggie's look of youth and "you-be-damned"
air; and he couldn't understand Reggie's friends--clean-built, careless men in
the Army--who rode over to big Sunday breakfasts at the Bank, and told sultry
stories till Riley got up and left the room. Riley was always showing Reggie
how the business ought to be conducted, and Reggie had more than once to
remind him that seven years' limited experience between Huddersfield and
Beverly did not qualify a man to steer a big up-country business. Then Riley
sulked and referred to himself as a pillar of the Bank and a cherished friend
of the Directors, and Reggie tore his hair. If a man's English subordinates
fail him in this country, he comes to a hard time indeed, for native help has
strict limitations. In the winter Riley went sick for weeks at a time with his
lung complaint, and this threw more work on Reggie. But he preferred it to the
everlasting friction when Riley was well.

One of the Travelling Inspectors of the Bank discovered these collapses and
reported them to the Directors. Now Riley had been foisted on the Bank by an
M. P., who wanted the support of Riley's father, who, again, was anxious to
get his son out to a warmer climate because of those lungs. The M. P. had an
interest in the Bank; but one of the Directors wanted to advance a nominee of
his own; and, after Riley's father had died, he made the rest of the Board see
that an Accountant who was sick for half the year, had better give place to a
healthy man. If Riley had known the real story of his appointment, he might
have behaved better; but knowing nothing, his stretches of sickness alternated
with restless, persistent, meddling irritation of Reggie, and all the hundred
ways in which conceit in a subordinate situation can find play. Reggie used to
call him striking and hair-curling names behind his back as a relief to his
own feelings; but he never abused him to his face, because he said: "Riley is
such a frail beast that half of his loathsome conceit is due to pains in the
chest."

Late one April, Riley went very sick indeed. The doctor punched him and
thumped him, and told him he would be better before long. Then the doctor went
to Reggie and said:--"Do you know how sick your Accountant is?" "No!" said
Reggie--"The worse the better, confound him! He's a clacking nuisance when
he's well. I'll let you take away the Bank Safe if you can drug him silent for
this hot-weather."

But the doctor did not laugh--"Man, I'm not joking," he said. "I'll give him
another three months in his bed and a week or so more to die in. On my honor
and reputation that's all the grace he has in this world. Consumption has hold
of him to the marrow."

Reggie's face changed at once into the face of "Mr. Reginald Burke," and he
answered:--"What can I do?"

"Nothing," said the doctor. "For all practical purposes the man is dead
already. Keep him quiet and cheerful and tell him he's going to recover.
That's all. I'll look after him to the end, of course."

The doctor went away, and Reggie sat down to open the evening mail.

His first letter was one from the Directors, intimating for his information
that Mr. Riley was to resign, under a month's notice, by the terms of his
agreement, telling Reggie that their letter to Riley would follow and advising
Reggie of the coming of a new Accountant, a man whom Reggie knew and liked.

Reggie lit a cheroot, and, before he had finished smoking, he had sketched the
outline of a fraud. He put away--"burked"--the Directors letter, and went in
to talk to Riley, who was as ungracious as usual, and fretting himself over
the way the bank would run during his illness. He never thought of the extra
work on Reggie's shoulders, but solely of the damage to his own prospects of
advancement. Then Reggie assured him that everything would be well, and that
he, Reggie, would confer with Riley daily on the management of the Bank. Riley
was a little soothed, but he hinted in as many words that he did not think
much of Reggie's business capacity.

Reggie was humble. And he had letters in his desk from the Directors that a
Gilbarte or a Hardie might have been proud of!

The days passed in the big darkened house, and the Directors' letter of
dismissal to Riley came and was put away by Reggie, who, every evening,
brought the books to Riley's room, and showed him what had been going forward,
while Riley snarled. Reggie did his best to make statements pleasing to Riley,
but the Accountant was sure that the Bank was going to rack and ruin without
him. In June, as the lying in bed told on his spirit, he asked whether his
absence had been noted by the Directors, and Reggie said that they had written
most sympathetic letters, hoping that he would be able to resume his valuable
services before long. He showed Riley the letters: and Riley said that the
Directors ought to have written to him direct.

A few days later, Reggie opened Riley's mail in the half-light of the room,
and gave him the sheet--not the envelope--of a letter to Riley from the
Directors. Riley said he would thank Reggie not to interfere with his private
papers, specially as Reggie knew he was too weak to open his own letters.
Reggie apologized.

Then Riley's mood changed, and he lectured Reggie on his evil ways: his horses
and his bad friends. "Of course, lying here on my back, Mr. Burke, I can't
keep you straight; but when I'm well, I DO hope you'll pay some heed to my
words." Reggie, who had dropped polo, and dinners, and tennis, and all to
attend to Riley, said that he was penitent and settled Riley's head on the
pillow and heard him fret and contradict in hard, dry, hacking whispers,
without a sign of impatience. This at the end of a heavy day's office work,
doing double duty, in the latter half of June.

When the new Accountant came, Reggie told him the facts of the case, and
announced to Riley that he had a guest staying with him. Riley said that he
might have had more consideration than to entertain his "doubtful friends" at
such a time. Reggie made Carron, the new Accountant, sleep at the Club in
consequence. Carron's arrival took some of the heavy work off his shoulders,
and he had time to attend to Riley's exactions--to explain, soothe, invent,
and settle and resettle the poor wretch in bed, and to forge complimentary
letters from Calcutta. At the end of the first month, Riley wished to send
some money home to his mother. Reggie sent the draft. At the end of the second
month, Riley's salary came in just the same. Reggie paid it out of his own
pocket; and, with it, wrote Riley a beautiful letter from the Directors.

Riley was very ill indeed, but the flame of his life burnt unsteadily. Now and
then he would be cheerful and confident about the future, sketching plans for
going Home and seeing his mother.

Reggie listened patiently when the office work was over, and encouraged him.

At other times Riley insisted on Reggie's reading the Bible and grim "Methody"
tracts to him. Out of these tracts he pointed morals directed at his Manager.
But he always found time to worry Reggie about the working of the Bank, and to
show him where the weak points lay.

This in-door, sick-room life and constant strains wore Reggie down a good
deal, and shook his nerves, and lowered his billiard-play by forty points. But
the business of the Bank, and the business of the sick-room, had to go on,
though the glass was 116 degrees in the shade.

At the end of the third month, Riley was sinking fast, and had begun to
realize that he was very sick. But the conceit that made him worry Reggie,
kept him from believing the worst. "He wants some sort of mental stimulant if
he is to drag on," said the doctor.

"Keep him interested in life if you care about his living." So Riley, contrary
to all the laws of business and the finance, received a 25-per-cent, rise of
salary from the Directors. The "mental stimulant" succeeded beautifully. Riley
was happy and cheerful, and, as is often the case in consumption, healthiest
in mind when the body was weakest. He lingered for a full month, snarling and
fretting about the Bank, talking of the future, hearing the Bible read,
lecturing Reggie on sin, and wondering when he would be able to move abroad.

But at the end of September, one mercilessly hot evening, he rose up in his
bed with a little gasp, and said quickly to Reggie:--"Mr. Burke, I am going to
die. I know it in myself. My chest is all hollow inside, and there's nothing
to breathe with. To the best of my knowledge I have done nowt"--he was
returning to the talk of his boyhood--"to lie heavy on my conscience. God be
thanked, I have been preserved from the grosser forms of sin; and I counsel
YOU, Mr. Burke . . . ."

Here his voice died down, and Reggie stooped over him.

"Send my salary for September to my mother. . . . done great things with the
Bank if I had been spared . . . . mistaken policy . . . . no fault of mine."

Then he turned his face to the wall and died.

Reggie drew the sheet over Its face, and went out into the verandah, with his
last "mental stimulant"--a letter of condolence and sympathy from the
Directors--unused in his pocket.

"If I'd been only ten minutes earlier," thought Reggie, "I might have
heartened him up to pull through another day."



TODS' AMENDMENT.

The World hath set its heavy yoke
Upon the old white-bearded folk
  Who strive to please the King.

God's mercy is upon the young,
God's wisdom in the baby tongue
  That fears not anything.
      --The Parable of Chajju Bhagat.

Now Tods' Mamma was a singularly charming woman, and every one in Simla knew
Tods. Most men had saved him from death on occasions.

He was beyond his ayah's control altogether, and perilled his life daily to
find out what would happen if you pulled a Mountain Battery mule's tail. He
was an utterly fearless young Pagan, about six years old, and the only baby
who ever broke the holy calm of the supreme Legislative Council.

It happened this way: Tods' pet kid got loose, and fled up the hill, off the
Boileaugunge Road, Tods after it, until it burst into the Viceregal Lodge
lawn, then attached to "Peterhoff." The Council were sitting at the time, and
the windows were open because it was warm. The Red Lancer in the porch told
Tods to go away; but Tods knew the Red Lancer and most of the Members of
Council personally.

Moreover, he had firm hold of the kid's collar, and was being dragged all
across the flower-beds. "Give my salaam to the long Councillor Sahib, and ask
him to help me take Moti back!" gasped Tods. The Council heard the noise
through the open windows; and, after an interval, was seen the shocking
spectacle of a Legal Member and a Lieutenant-Governor helping, under the
direct patronage of a Commander-in-Chief and a Viceroy, one small and very
dirty boy in a sailor's suit and a tangle of brown hair, to coerce a lively
and rebellious kid. They headed it off down the path to the Mall, and Tods
went home in triumph and told his Mamma that ALL the Councillor Sahibs had
been helping him to catch Moti. Whereat his Mamma smacked Tods for interfering
with the administration of the Empire; but Tods met the Legal Member the next
day, and told him in confidence that if the Legal Member ever wanted to catch
a goat, he, Tods, would give him all the help in his power. "Thank you, Tods,"
said the Legal Member.

Tods was the idol of some eighty jhampanis, and half as many saises.

He saluted them all as "O Brother." It never entered his head that any living
human being could disobey his orders; and he was the buffer between the
servants and his Mamma's wrath. The working of that household turned on Tods,
who was adored by every one from the dhoby to the dog-boy. Even Futteh Khan,
the villainous loafer khit from Mussoorie, shirked risking Tods' displeasure
for fear his co-mates should look down on him.

So Tods had honor in the land from Boileaugunge to Chota Simla, and ruled
justly according to his lights. Of course, he spoke Urdu, but he had also
mastered many queer side-speeches like the chotee bolee of the women, and held
grave converse with shopkeepers and Hill-coolies alike. He was precocious for
his age, and his mixing with natives had taught him some of the more bitter
truths of life; the meanness and the sordidness of it. He used, over his bread
and milk, to deliver solemn and serious aphorisms, translated from the
vernacular into the English, that made his Mamma jump and vow that Tods MUST
go home next hot weather.

Just when Tods was in the bloom of his power, the Supreme Legislature were
hacking out a Bill, for the Sub-Montane Tracts, a revision of the then Act,
smaller than the Punjab Land Bill, but affecting a few hundred thousand people
none the less. The Legal Member had built, and bolstered, and embroidered, and
amended that Bill, till it looked beautiful on paper. Then the Council began
to settle what they called the "minor details." As if any Englishman
legislating for natives knows enough to know which are the minor and which are
the major points, from the native point of view, of any measure! That Bill was
a triumph of "safe-guarding the interests of the tenant." One clause provided
that land should not be leased on longer terms than five years at a stretch;
because, if the landlord had a tenant bound down for, say, twenty years, he
would squeeze the very life out of him. The notion was to keep up a stream of
independent cultivators in the Sub-Montane Tracts; and ethnologically and
politically the notion was correct. The only drawback was that it was
altogether wrong. A native's life in India implies the life of his son.
Wherefore, you cannot legislate for one generation at a time. You must
consider the next from the native point of view. Curiously enough, the native
now and then, and in Northern India more particularly, hates being over-
protected against himself. There was a Naga village once, where they lived on
dead AND buried Commissariat mules . . . . But that is another story.

For many reasons, to be explained later, the people concerned objected to the
Bill. The Native Member in Council knew as much about Punjabis as he knew
about Charing Cross. He had said in Calcutta that "the Bill was entirely in
accord with the desires of that large and important class, the cultivators;"
and so on, and so on. The Legal Member's knowledge of natives was limited to
English-speaking Durbaris, and his own red chaprassis, the Sub-Montane Tracts
concerned no one in particular, the Deputy Commissioners were a good deal too
driven to make representations, and the measure was one which dealt with small
landholders only. Nevertheless, the Legal Member prayed that it might be
correct, for he was a nervously conscientious man. He did not know that no man
can tell what natives think unless he mixes with them with the varnish off.
And not always then. But he did the best he knew. And the measure came up to
the Supreme Council for the final touches, while Tods patrolled the Burra
Simla Bazar in his morning rides, and played with the monkey belonging to
Ditta Mull, the bunnia, and listened, as a child listens to all the stray talk
about this new freak of the Lat Sahib's.

One day there was a dinner-party, at the house of Tods' Mamma, and the Legal
Member came. Tods was in bed, but he kept awake till he heard the bursts of
laughter from the men over the coffee. Then he paddled out in his little red
flannel dressing-gown and his night-suit, and took refuge by the side of his
father, knowing that he would not be sent back. "See the miseries of having a
family!" said Tods' father, giving Tods three prunes, some water in a glass
that had been used for claret, and telling him to sit still. Tods sucked the
prunes slowly, knowing that he would have to go when they were finished, and
sipped the pink water like a man of the world, as he listened to the
conversation. Presently, the Legal Member, talking "shop," to the Head of a
Department, mentioned his Bill by its full name--"The Sub-Montane Tracts
Ryotwari Revised Enactment." Tods caught the one native word, and lifting up
his small voice said:--"Oh, I know ALL about that! Has it been murramutted
yet, Councillor Sahib?"

"How much?" said the Legal Member.

"Murramutted--mended.--Put theek, you know--made nice to please Ditta Mull!"

The Legal Member left his place and moved up next to Tods.

"What do you know about Ryotwari, little man?" he said.

"I'm not a little man, I'm Tods, and I know ALL about it. Ditta Mull, and
Choga Lall, and Amir Nath, and--oh, lakhs of my friends tell me about it in
the bazars when I talk to them."

"Oh, they do--do they? What do they say, Tods?"

Tods tucked his feet under his red flannel dressing-gown and said:--"I must
fink."

The Legal Member waited patiently. Then Tods, with infinite compassion:

"You don't speak my talk, do you, Councillor Sahib?"

"No; I am sorry to say I do not," said the Legal' Member.

"Very well," said Tods. "I must fink in English."

He spent a minute putting his ideas in order, and began very slowly,
translating in his mind from the vernacular to English, as many Anglo-Indian
children do. You must remember that the Legal Member helped him on by
questions when he halted, for Tods was not equal to the sustained flight of
oratory that follows.

"Ditta Mull says:--'This thing is the talk of a child, and was made up by
fools.' But I don't think you are a fool, Councillor Sahib," said Tods,
hastily. "You caught my goat. This is what Ditta Mull says:--'I am not a fool,
and why should the Sirkar say I am a child? I can see if the land is good and
if the landlord is good. If I am a fool, the sin is upon my own head. For five
years I take my ground for which I have saved money, and a wife I take too, and
a little son is born.' Ditta Mull has one daughter now, but he SAYS he will
have a son, soon. And he says: 'At the end of five years, by this new
bundobust, I must go. If I do not go, I must get fresh seals and takkus-stamps
on the papers, perhaps in the middle of the harvest, and to go to the law-
courts once is wisdom, but to go twice is Jehannum.' That is QUITE true,"
explained Tods, gravely. "All my friends say so. And Ditta Mull says:--'Always
fresh takkus and paying money to vakils and chaprassis and law-courts every
five years or else the landlord makes me go. Why do I want to go? Am I fool? If
I am a fool and do not know, after forty years, good land when I see it, let me
die! But if the new bundobust says for FIFTEEN years, then it is good and wise.
My little son is a man, and I am burnt, and he takes the ground or another
ground, paying only once for the takkus-stamps on the papers, and his little
son is born, and at the end of fifteen years is a man too. But what profit is
there in five years and fresh papers? Nothing but dikh, trouble, dikh. We are
not young men who take these lands, but old ones--not jais, but tradesmen with
a little money--and for fifteen years we shall have peace. Nor are we children
that the Sirkar should treat us so."

Here Tods stopped short, for the whole table were listening. The Legal Member
said to Tods: "Is that all?"

"All I can remember," said Tods. "But you should see Ditta Mull's big monkey.
It's just like a Councillor Sahib."

"Tods! Go to bed," said his father.

Tods gathered up his dressing-gown tail and departed.

The Legal Member brought his hand down on the table with a crash--"By Jove!"
said the Legal Member, "I believe the boy is right. The short tenure IS the
weak point."

He left early, thinking over what Tods had said. Now, it was obviously
impossible for the Legal Member to play with a bunnia's monkey, by way of
getting understanding; but he did better. He made inquiries, always bearing in
mind the fact that the real native--not the hybrid, University-trained mule--is
as timid as a colt, and, little by little, he coaxed some of the men whom the
measure concerned most intimately to give in their views, which squared very
closely with Tods' evidence.

So the Bill was amended in that clause; and the Legal Member was filled with an
uneasy suspicion that Native Members represent very little except the Orders
they carry on their bosoms. But he put the thought from him as illiberal. He
was a most Liberal Man.

After a time the news spread through the bazars that Tods had got the Bill
recast in the tenure clause, and if Tods' Mamma had not interfered, Tods would
have made himself sick on the baskets of fruit and pistachio nuts and Cabuli
grapes and almonds that crowded the verandah. Till he went Home, Tods ranked
some few degrees before the Viceroy in popular estimation. But for the little
life of him Tods could not understand why.

In the Legal Member's private-paper-box still lies the rough draft of the Sub-
Montane Tracts Ryotwari Revised Enactment; and, opposite the twenty-second
clause, pencilled in blue chalk, and signed by the Legal Member, are the words
"Tods' Amendment."



IN THE PRIDE OF HIS YOUTH.

"Stopped in the straight when the race was his own!
Look at him cutting it--cur to the bone!"
"Ask ere the youngster be rated and chidden,
What did he carry and how was he ridden?
Maybe they used him too much at the start;
Maybe Fate's weight-cloths are breaking his heart."
         --Life's Handicap.

When I was telling you of the joke that The Worm played off on the Senior
Subaltern, I promised a somewhat similar tale, but with all the jest left out.
This is that tale:

Dicky Hatt was kidnapped in his early, early youth--neither by landlady's
daughter, housemaid, barmaid, nor cook, but by a girl so nearly of his own
caste that only a woman could have said she was just the least little bit in
the world below it. This happened a month before he came out to India, and five
days after his one-and-twentieth birthday. The girl was nineteen--six years
older than Dicky in the things of this world, that is to say--and, for the
time, twice as foolish as he.

Excepting, always, falling off a horse there is nothing more fatally easy than
marriage before the Registrar. The ceremony costs less than fifty shillings,
and is remarkably like walking into a pawn-shop. After the declarations of
residence have been put in, four minutes will cover the rest of the
proceedings--fees, attestation, and all. Then the Registrar slides the
blotting-pad over the names, and says grimly, with his pen between his teeth:--
"Now you're man and wife;" and the couple walk out into the street, feeling as
if something were horribly illegal somewhere.

But that ceremony holds and can drag a man to his undoing just as thoroughly as
the "long as ye both shall live" curse from the altar-rails, with the
bridesmaids giggling behind, and "The Voice that breathed o'er Eden" lifting
the roof off. In this manner was Dicky Hatt kidnapped, and he considered it
vastly fine, for he had received an appointment in India which carried a
magnificent salary from the Home point of view. The marriage was to be kept
secret for a year. Then Mrs. Dicky Hatt was to come out and the rest of life
was to be a glorious golden mist. That was how they sketched it under the
Addison Road Station lamps; and, after one short month, came Gravesend and
Dicky steaming out to his new life, and the girl crying in a thirty-shillings a
week bed-and-living room, in a back street off Montpelier Square near the
Knightsbridge Barracks.

But the country that Dicky came to was a hard land, where "men" of twenty-one
were reckoned very small boys indeed, and life was expensive. The salary that
loomed so large six thousand miles away did not go far. Particularly when Dicky
divided it by two, and remitted more than the fair half, at 1-6, to Montpelier
Square. One hundred and thirty-five rupees out of three hundred and thirty is
not much to live on; but it was absurd to suppose that Mrs. Hatt could exist
forever on the 20 pounds held back by Dicky, from his outfit allowance. Dicky
saw this, and remitted at once; always remembering that Rs. 700 were to be
paid, twelve months later, for a first-class passage out for a lady. When you
add to these trifling details the natural instincts of a boy beginning a new
life in a new country and longing to go about and enjoy himself, and the
necessity for grappling with strange work--which, properly speaking, should
take up a boy's undivided attention--you will see that Dicky started
handicapped. He saw it himself for a breath or two; but he did not guess the
full beauty of his future.

As the hot weather began, the shackles settled on him and ate into his flesh.
First would come letters--big, crossed, seven sheet letters--from his wife,
telling him how she longed to see him, and what a Heaven upon earth would be
their property when they met.

Then some boy of the chummery wherein Dicky lodged would pound on the door of
his bare little room, and tell him to come out and look at a pony--the very
thing to suit him. Dicky could not afford ponies. He had to explain this. Dicky
could not afford living in the chummery, modest as it was. He had to explain
this before he moved to a single room next the office where he worked all day.
He kept house on a green oil-cloth table-cover, one chair, one charpoy, one
photograph, one tooth-glass, very strong and thick, a seven-rupee eight-anna
filter, and messing by contract at thirty-seven rupees a month. Which last item
was extortion. He had no punkah, for a punkah costs fifteen rupees a month; but
he slept on the roof of the office with all his wife's letters under his
pillow. Now and again he was asked out to dinner where he got both a punkah and
an iced drink. But this was seldom, for people objected to recognizing a boy
who had evidently the instincts of a Scotch tallow-chandler, and who lived in
such a nasty fashion. Dicky could not subscribe to any amusement, so he found
no amusement except the pleasure of turning over his Bank-book and reading what
it said about "loans on approved security." That cost nothing. He remitted
through a Bombay Bank, by the way, and the Station knew nothing of his private
affairs.

Every month he sent Home all he could possibly spare for his wife--and for
another reason which was expected to explain itself shortly and would require
more money.

About this time, Dicky was overtaken with the nervous, haunting fear that
besets married men when they are out of sorts. He had no pension to look to.
What if he should die suddenly, and leave his wife unprovided for? The thought
used to lay hold of him in the still, hot nights on the roof, till the shaking
of his heart made him think that he was going to die then and there of heart-
disease.

Now this is a frame of mind which no boy has a right to know. It is a strong
man's trouble; but, coming when it did, it nearly drove poor punkah-less,
perspiring Dicky Hatt mad. He could tell no one about it.

A certain amount of "screw" is as necessary for a man as for a billiard-ball.
It makes them both do wonderful things. Dicky needed money badly, and he worked
for it like a horse. But, naturally, the men who owned him knew that a boy can
live very comfortably on a certain income--pay in India is a matter of age, not
merit, you see, and if their particular boy wished to work like two boys,
Business forbid that they should stop him! But Business forbid that they should
give him an increase of pay at his present ridiculously immature age! So Dicky
won certain rises of salary--ample for a boy--not enough for a wife and child--
certainly too little for the seven-hundred-rupee passage that he and Mrs. Hatt
had discussed so lightly once upon a time. And with this he was forced to be
content.

Somehow, all his money seemed to fade away in Home drafts and the crushing
Exchange, and the tone of the Home letters changed and grew querulous. "Why
wouldn't Dicky have his wife and the baby out? Surely he had a salary--a fine
salary--and it was too bad of him to enjoy himself in India. But would he--
could he--make the next draft a little more elastic?" Here followed a list of
baby's kit, as long as a Parsee's bill. Then Dicky, whose heart yearned to his
wife and the little son he had never seen--which, again, is a feeling no boy is
entitled to--enlarged the draft and wrote queer half-boy, half- man letters,
saying that life was not so enjoyable after all and would the little wife wait
yet a little longer? But the little wife, however much she approved of money,
objected to waiting, and there was a strange, hard sort of ring in her letters
that Dicky didn't understand. How could he, poor boy?

Later on still--just as Dicky had been told--apropos of another youngster who
had "made a fool of himself," as the saying is--that matrimony would not only
ruin his further chances of advancement, but would lose him his present
appointment--came the news that the baby, his own little, little son, had died,
and, behind this, forty lines of an angry woman's scrawl, saying that death
might have been averted if certain things, all costing money, had been done, or
if the mother and the baby had been with Dicky. The letter struck at Dicky's
naked heart; but, not being officially entitled to a baby, he could show no
sign of trouble.

How Dicky won through the next four months, and what hope he kept alight to
force him into his work, no one dare say. He pounded on, the seven-hundred-
rupee passage as far away as ever, and his style of living unchanged, except
when he launched into a new filter.

There was the strain of his office-work, and the strain of his remittances, and
the knowledge of his boy's death, which touched the boy more, perhaps, than it
would have touched a man; and, beyond all, the enduring strain of his daily
life. Gray-headed seniors, who approved of his thrift and his fashion of
denying himself everything pleasant, reminded him of the old saw that says:

   "If a youth would be distinguished in his art, art, art,
    He must keep the girls away from his heart, heart, heart."

And Dicky, who fancied he had been through every trouble that a man is
permitted to know, had to laugh and agree; with the last line of his balanced
Bank-book jingling in his head day and night.

But he had one more sorrow to digest before the end. There arrived a letter
from the little wife--the natural sequence of the others if Dicky had only
known it--and the burden of that letter was "gone with a handsomer man than
you." It was a rather curious production, without stops, something like this:--
"She was not going to wait forever and the baby was dead and Dicky was only a
boy and he would never set eyes on her again and why hadn't he waved his
handkerchief to her when he left Gravesend and God was her judge she was a
wicked woman but Dicky was worse enjoying himself in India and this other man
loved the ground she trod on and would Dicky ever forgive her for she would
never forgive Dicky; and there was no address to write to."

Instead of thanking his lucky stars that he was free, Dicky discovered exactly
how an injured husband feels--again, not at all the knowledge to which a boy is
entitled--for his mind went back to his wife as he remembered her in the
thirty-shilling "suite" in Montpelier Square, when the dawn of his last morning
in England was breaking, and she was crying in the bed. Whereat he rolled about
on his bed and bit his fingers. He never stopped to think whether, if he had
met Mrs. Hatt after those two years, he would have discovered that he and she
had grown quite different and new persons. This, theoretically, he ought to
have done. He spent the night after the English Mail came in rather severe
pain.

Next morning, Dicky Hatt felt disinclined to work. He argued that he had missed
the pleasure of youth. He was tired, and he had tasted all the sorrow in life
before three-and-twenty. His Honor was gone--that was the man; and now he, too,
would go to the Devil--that was the boy in him. So he put his head down on the
green oil-cloth table-cover, and wept before resigning his post, and all it
offered.

But the reward of his services came. He was given three days to reconsider
himself, and the Head of the establishment, after some telegraphings, said that
it was a most unusual step, but, in view of the ability that Mr. Hatt had
displayed at such and such a time, at such and such junctures, he was in a
position to offer him an infinitely superior post--first on probation, and
later, in the natural course of things, on confirmation. "And how much does the
post carry?" said Dicky. "Six hundred and fifty rupees," said the Head slowly,
expecting to see the young man sink with gratitude and joy.

And it came then! The seven hundred rupee passage, and enough to have saved the
wife, and the little son, and to have allowed of assured and open marriage,
came then. Dicky burst into a roar of laughter--laughter he could not check--
nasty, jangling merriment that seemed as if it would go on forever. When he had
recovered himself he said, quite seriously:--"I'm tired of work. I'm an old man
now. It's about time I retired. And I will."

"The boy's mad!" said the Head.

I think he was right; but Dicky Hatt never reappeared to settle the question.



 PIG.

Go, stalk the red deer o'er the heather
  Ride, follow the fox if you can!
But, for pleasure and profit together,
  Allow me the hunting of Man,--
The chase of the Human, the search for the Soul
  To its ruin,--the hunting of Man.
             --The Old Shikarri.

I believe the difference began in the matter of a horse, with a twist in his
temper, whom Pinecoffin sold to Nafferton and by whom Nafferton was nearly
slain. There may have been other causes of offence; the horse was the official
stalking-horse. Nafferton was very angry; but Pinecoffin laughed and said that
he had never guaranteed the beast's manners. Nafferton laughed, too, though he
vowed that he would write off his fall against Pinecoffin if he waited five
years. Now, a Dalesman from beyond Skipton will forgive an injury when the
Strid lets a man live; but a South Devon man is as soft as a Dartmoor bog. You
can see from their names that Nafferton had the race-advantage of Pinecoffin.
He was a peculiar man, and his notions of humor were cruel. He taught me a new
and fascinating form of shikar. He hounded Pinecoffin from Mithankot to
Jagadri, and from Gurgaon to Abbottabad up and across the Punjab, a large
province and in places remarkably dry. He said that he had no intention of
allowing Assistant Commissioners to "sell him pups," in the shape of ramping,
screaming countrybreds, without making their lives a burden to them.

Most Assistant Commissioners develop a bent for some special work after their
first hot weather in the country. The boys with digestions hope to write their
names large on the Frontier and struggle for dreary places like Bannu and
Kohat. The bilious ones climb into the Secretariat. Which is very bad for the
liver.

Others are bitten with a mania for District work, Ghuznivide coins or Persian
poetry; while some, who come of farmers' stock, find that the smell of the
Earth after the Rains gets into their blood, and calls them to "develop the
resources of the Province." These men are enthusiasts. Pinecoffin belonged to
their class. He knew a great many facts bearing on the cost of bullocks and
temporary wells, and opium-scrapers, and what happens if you burn too much
rubbish on a field, in the hope of enriching used-up soil. All the Pinecoffins
come of a landholding breed, and so the land only took back her own again.
Unfortunately--most unfortunately for Pinecoffin--he was a Civilian, as well as
a farmer. Nafferton watched him, and thought about the horse. Nafferton said:--
"See me chase that boy till he drops!" I said:--"You can't get your knife into
an Assistant Commissioner." Nafferton told me that I did not understand the
administration of the Province.

Our Government is rather peculiar. It gushes on the agricultural and general
information side, and will supply a moderately respectable man with all sorts
of "economic statistics," if he speaks to it prettily. For instance, you are
interested in gold-washing in the sands of the Sutlej. You pull the string, and
find that it wakes up half a dozen Departments, and finally communicates, say,
with a friend of yours in the Telegraph, who once wrote some notes on the
customs of the gold-washers when he was on construction-work in their part of
the Empire. He may or may not be pleased at being ordered to write out
everything he knows for your benefit. This depends on his temperament. The
bigger man you are, the more information and the greater trouble can you raise.

Nafferton was not a big man; but he had the reputation of being very earnest."
An "earnest" man can do much with a Government. There was an earnest man who
once nearly wrecked . . . but all India knows THAT story. I am not sure what
real "earnestness" is. A very fair imitation can be manufactured by neglecting
to dress decently, by mooning about in a dreamy, misty sort of way, by taking
office-work home after staying in office till seven, and by receiving crowds of
native gentlemen on Sundays. That is one sort of "earnestness."

Nafferton cast about for a peg whereon to hang his earnestness, and for a
string that would communicate with Pinecoffin. He found both.

They were Pig. Nafferton became an earnest inquirer after Pig. He informed the
Government that he had a scheme whereby a very large percentage of the British
Army in India could be fed, at a very large saving, on Pig. Then he hinted that
Pinecoffin might supply him with the "varied information necessary to the
proper inception of the scheme." So the Government wrote on the back of the
letter:--"Instruct Mr. Pinecoffin to furnish Mr. Nafferton with any information
in his power." Government is very prone to writing things on the backs of
letters which, later, lead to trouble and confusion.

Nafferton had not the faintest interest in Pig, but he knew that Pinecoffin
would flounce into the trap. Pinecoffin was delighted at being consulted about
Pig. The Indian Pig is not exactly an important factor in agricultural life;
but Nafferton explained to Pinecoffin that there was room for improvement, and
corresponded direct with that young man.

You may think that there is not much to be evolved from Pig. It all depends how
you set to work. Pinecoffin being a Civilian and wishing to do things
thoroughly, began with an essay on the Primitive Pig, the Mythology of the Pig,
and the Dravidian Pig.

Nafferton filed that information--twenty-seven foolscap sheets--and wanted to
know about the distribution of the Pig in the Punjab, and how it stood the
Plains in the hot weather. From this point onwards, remember that I am giving
you only the barest outlines of the affair--the guy-ropes, as it were, of the
web that Nafferton spun round Pinecoffin.

Pinecoffin made a colored Pig-population map, and collected observations on the
comparative longevity of the Pig (a) in the sub-montane tracts of the
Himalayas, and (b) in the Rechna Doab.

Nafferton filed that, and asked what sort of people looked after Pig. This
started an ethnological excursus on swineherds, and drew from Pinecoffin long
tables showing the proportion per thousand of the caste in the Derajat.
Nafferton filed that bundle, and explained that the figures which he wanted
referred to the Cis-Sutlej states, where he understood that Pigs were very fine
and large, and where he proposed to start a Piggery. By this time, Government
had quite forgotten their instructions to Mr. Pinecoffin.

They were like the gentlemen, in Keats' poem, who turned well-oiled wheels to
skin other people. But Pinecoffin was just entering into the spirit of the Pig-
hunt, as Nafferton well knew he would do. He had a fair amount of work of his
own to clear away; but he sat up of nights reducing Pig to five places of
decimals for the honor of his Service. He was not going to appear ignorant of
so easy a subject as Pig.

Then Government sent him on special duty to Kohat, to "inquire into" the big-
seven-foot, iron-shod spades of that District. People had been killing each
other with those peaceful tools; and Government wished to know "whether a
modified form of agricultural implement could not, tentatively and as a
temporary measure, be introduced among the agricultural population without
needlessly or unduly exasperating the existing religious sentiments of the
peasantry."

Between those spades and Nafferton's Pig, Pinecoffin was rather heavily
burdened.

 Nafferton now began to take up "(a) The food-supply of the indigenous Pig,
with a view to the improvement of its capacities as a flesh-former. (b) The
acclimatization of the exotic Pig, maintaining its distinctive peculiarities."
Pinecoffin replied exhaustively that the exotic Pig would become merged in the
indigenous type; and quoted horse-breeding statistics to prove this.

The side-issue was debated, at great length on Pinecoffin's side, till
Nafferton owned that he had been in the wrong, and moved the previous question.
When Pinecoffin had quite written himself out about flesh-formers, and fibrins,
and glucose and the nitrogenous constituents of maize and lucerne, Nafferton
raised the question of expense. By this time Pinecoffin, who had been
transferred from Kohat, had developed a Pig theory of his own, which he stated
in thirty-three folio pages--all carefully filed by Nafferton. Who asked for
more.

These things took ten months, and Pinecoffin's interest in the potential
Piggery seemed to die down after he had stated his own views. But Nafferton
bombarded him with letters on "the Imperial aspect of the scheme, as tending to
officialize the sale of pork, and thereby calculated to give offence to the
Mahomedan population of Upper India." He guessed that Pinecoffin would want
some broad, free-hand work after his niggling, stippling, decimal details.

Pinecoffin handled the latest development of the case in masterly style, and
proved that no "popular ebullition of excitement was to be apprehended."
Nafferton said that there was nothing like Civilian insight in matters of this
kind, and lured him up a bye-path--"the possible profits to accrue to the
Government from the sale of hog-bristles." There is an extensive literature of
hog-bristles, and the shoe, brush, and colorman's trades recognize more
varieties of bristles than you would think possible. After Pinecoffin had
wondered a little at Nafferton's rage for information, he sent back a
monograph, fifty-one pages, on "Products of the Pig." This led him, under
Nafferton's tender handling, straight to the Cawnpore factories, the trade in
hog-skin for saddles--and thence to the tanners. Pinecoffin wrote that
pomegranate-seed was the best cure for hog-skin, and suggested--for the past
fourteen months had wearied him--that Nafferton should "raise his pigs before
he tanned them."

Nafferton went back to the second section of his fifth question.

How could the exotic Pig be brought to give as much pork as it did in the West
and yet "assume the essentially hirsute characteristics of its oriental
congener?" Pinecoffin felt dazed, for he had forgotten what he had written
sixteen month's before, and fancied that he was about to reopen the entire
question. He was too far involved in the hideous tangle to retreat, and, in a
weak moment, he wrote:--"Consult my first letter." Which related to the
Dravidian Pig. As a matter of fact, Pinecoffin had still to reach the
acclimatization stage; having gone off on a side-issue on the merging of types.

THEN Nafferton really unmasked his batteries! He complained to the Government,
in stately language, of "the paucity of help accorded to me in my earnest
attempts to start a potentially remunerative industry, and the flippancy with
which my requests for information are treated by a gentleman whose pseudo-
scholarly attainments should at lest have taught him the primary differences
between the Dravidian and the Berkshire variety of the genus Sus. If I am to
understand that the letter to which he refers me contains his serious views on
the acclimatization of a valuable, though possibly uncleanly, animal, I am
reluctantly compelled to believe," etc., etc.

There was a new man at the head of the Department of Castigation.

The wretched Pinecoffin was told that the Service was made for the Country, and
not the Country for the Service, and that he had better begin to supply
information about Pigs.

Pinecoffin answered insanely that he had written everything that could be
written about Pig, and that some furlough was due to him.

Nafferton got a copy of that letter, and sent it, with the essay on the
Dravidian Pig, to a down-country paper, which printed both in full. The essay
was rather highflown; but if the Editor had seen the stacks of paper, in
Pinecoffin's handwriting, on Nafferton's table, he would not have been so
sarcastic about the "nebulous discursiveness and blatant self-sufficiency of
the modern Competition-wallah, and his utter inability to grasp the practical
issues of a practical question." Many friends cut out these remarks and sent
them to Pinecoffin.

I have already stated that Pinecoffin came of a soft stock. This last stroke
frightened and shook him. He could not understand it; but he felt he had been,
somehow, shamelessly betrayed by Nafferton.

He realized that he had wrapped himself up in the Pigskin without need, and
that he could not well set himself right with his Government. All his
acquaintances asked after his "nebulous discursiveness" or his "blatant self-
sufficiency," and this made him miserable.

He took a train and went to Nafferton, whom he had not seen since the Pig
business began. He also took the cutting from the paper, and blustered feebly
and called Nafferton names, and then died down to a watery, weak protest of the
"I-say-it's-too-bad-you-know" order.

Nafferton was very sympathetic.

"I'm afraid I've given you a good deal of trouble, haven't I?" said he.

"Trouble!" whimpered Pinecoffin; "I don't mind the trouble so much, though that
was bad enough; but what I resent is this showing up in print. It will stick to
me like a burr all through my service. And I DID do my best for your
interminable swine. It's too bad of you, on my soul it is!"

"I don't know," said Nafferton; "have you ever been stuck with a horse? It
isn't the money I mind, though that is bad enough; but what I resent is the
chaff that follows, especially from the boy who stuck me. But I think we'll cry
quite now."

Pinecoffin found nothing to say save bad words; and Nafferton smiled ever so
sweetly, and asked him to dinner.



THE ROUT OF THE WHITE HUSSARS.

It was not in the open fight
  We threw away the sword,
But in the lonely watching
  In the darkness by the ford.

The waters lapped, the night-wind blew,
Full-armed the Fear was born and grew,
And we were flying ere we knew
  From panic in the night.
          --Beoni Bar.

Some people hold that an English Cavalry regiment cannot run. This is a
mistake. I have seen four hundred and thirty-seven sabres flying over the face
of the country in abject terror--have seen the best Regiment that ever drew
bridle, wiped off the Army List for the space of two hours. If you repeat this
tale to the White Hussars they will, in all probability, treat you severely.
They are not proud of the incident.

You may know the White Hussars by their "side," which is greater than that of
all the Cavalry Regiments on the roster. If this is not a sufficient mark, you
may know them by their old brandy. It has been sixty years in the Mess and is
worth going far to taste.

Ask for the "McGaire" old brandy, and see that you get it. If the Mess Sergeant
thinks that you are uneducated, and that the genuine article will be lost on
you, he will treat you accordingly. He is a good man. But, when you are at
Mess, you must never talk to your hosts about forced marches or long-distance
rides. The Mess are very sensitive; and, if they think that you are laughing at
them, will tell you so.

As the White Hussars say, it was all the Colonel's fault. He was a new man, and
he ought never to have taken the Command. He said that the Regiment was not
smart enough. This to the White Hussars, who knew they could walk round any
Horse and through any Guns, and over any Foot on the face of the earth! That
insult was the first cause of offence.

Then the Colonel cast the Drum-Horse--the Drum-Horse of the White Hussars!
Perhaps you do not see what an unspeakable crime he had committed. I will try
to make it clear. The soul of the Regiment lives in the Drum-Horse, who carries
the silver kettle-drums. He is nearly always a big piebald Waler. That is a
point of honor; and a Regiment will spend anything you please on a piebald. He
is beyond the ordinary laws of casting. His work is very light, and he only
manoeuvres at a foot-pace. Wherefore, so long as he can step out and look
handsome, his well-being is assured. He knows more about the Regiment than the
Adjutant, and could not make a mistake if he tried.

The Drum-Horse of the White Hussars was only eighteen years old, and perfectly
equal to his duties. He had at least six years' more work in him, and carried
himself with all the pomp and dignity of a Drum-Major of the Guards. The
Regiment had paid Rs. 1,200 for him.

But the Colonel said that he must go, and he was cast in due form and replaced
by a washy, bay beast as ugly as a mule, with a ewe-neck, rat-tail, and cow-
hocks. The Drummer detested that animal, and the best of the Band-horses put
back their ears and showed the whites of their eyes at the very sight of him.
They knew him for an upstart and no gentleman. I fancy that the Colonel's ideas
of smartness extended to the Band, and that he wanted to make it take part in
the regular parade movements. A Cavalry Band is a sacred thing. It only turns
out for Commanding Officers' parades, and the Band Master is one degree more
important than the Colonel. He is a High Priest and the "Keel Row" is his holy
song. The "Keel Row" is the Cavalry Trot; and the man who has never heard that
tune rising, high and shrill, above the rattle of the Regiment going past the
saluting-base, has something yet to hear and understand.

When the Colonel cast the Drum-horse of the White Hussars, there was nearly a
mutiny.

The officers were angry, the Regiment were furious, and the Bandsman swore--
like troopers. The Drum-Horse was going to be put up to auction--public
auction--to be bought, perhaps, by a Parsee and put into a cart! It was worse
than exposing the inner life of the Regiment to the whole world, or selling the
Mess Plate to a Jew--a black Jew.

The Colonel was a mean man and a bully. He knew what the Regiment thought about
his action; and, when the troopers offered to buy the Drum-Horse, he said that
their offer was mutinous and forbidden by the Regulations.

But one of the Subalterns--Hogan-Yale, an Irishman--bought the Drum-Horse for
Rs. 160 at the sale; and the Colonel was wroth. Yale professed repentance--he
was unnaturally submissive--and said that, as he had only made the purchase to
save the horse from possible ill-treatment and starvation, he would now shoot
him and end the business. This appeared to soothe the Colonel, for he wanted
the Drum-Horse disposed of. He felt that he had made a mistake, and could not
of course acknowledge it. Meantime, the presence of the Drum-Horse was an
annoyance to him.

Yale took to himself a glass of the old brandy, three cheroots, and his friend,
Martyn; and they all left the Mess together. Yale and Martyn conferred for two
hours in Yale's quarters; but only the bull-terrier who keeps watch over Yale's
boot-trees knows what they said. A horse, hooded and sheeted to his ears, left
Yale's stables and was taken, very unwillingly, into the Civil Lines. Yale's
groom went with him. Two men broke into the Regimental Theatre and took several
paint-pots and some large scenery brushes. Then night fell over the
Cantonments, and there was a noise as of a horse kicking his loose-box to
pieces in Yale's stables. Yale had a big, old, white Waler trap-horse.

The next day was a Thursday, and the men, hearing that Yale was going to shoot
the Drum-Horse in the evening, determined to give the beast a regular
regimental funeral--a finer one than they would have given the Colonel had he
died just then. They got a bullock-cart and some sacking, and mounds and mounds
of roses, and the body, under sacking, was carried out to the place where the
anthrax cases were cremated; two-thirds of the Regiment followed. There was no
Band, but they all sang "The Place where the old Horse died" as something
respectful and appropriate to the occasion. When the corpse was dumped into the
grave and the men began throwing down armfuls of roses to cover it, the
Farrier-Sergeant ripped out an oath and said aloud:--"Why, it ain't the Drum-
Horse any more than it's me!" The Troop-Sergeant-Majors asked him whether he
had left his head in the Canteen. The Farrier-Sergeant said that he knew the
Drum-Horse's feet as well as he knew his own; but he was silenced when he saw
the regimental number burnt in on the poor stiff, upturned near-fore.

Thus was the Drum-Horse of the White Hussars buried; the Farrier-Sergeant
grumbling. The sacking that covered the corpse was smeared in places with black
paint; and the Farrier-Sergeant drew attention to this fact. But the Troop-
Sergeant-Major of E Troop kicked him severely on the shin, and told him that he
was undoubtedly drunk.

On the Monday following the burial, the Colonel sought revenge on the White
Hussars. Unfortunately, being at that time temporarily in Command of the
Station, he ordered a Brigade field-day. He said that he wished to make the
regiment "sweat for their damned insolence," and he carried out his notion
thoroughly. That Monday was one of the hardest days in the memory of the White
Hussars.

They were thrown against a skeleton-enemy, and pushed forward, and withdrawn,
and dismounted, and "scientifically handled" in every possible fashion over
dusty country, till they sweated profusely.

Their only amusement came late in the day, when they fell upon the battery of
Horse Artillery and chased it for two mile's. This was a personal question, and
most of the troopers had money on the event; the Gunners saying openly that
they had the legs of the White Hussars. They were wrong. A march-past concluded
the campaign, and when the Regiment got back to their Lines, the men were
coated with dirt from spur to chin-strap.

The White Hussars have one great and peculiar privilege. They won it at
Fontenoy, I think.

Many Regiments possess special rights, such as wearing collars with undress
uniform, or a bow of ribbon between the shoulders, or red and white roses in
their helmets on certain days of the year. Some rights are connected with
regimental saints, and some with regimental successes. All are valued highly;
but none so highly as the right of the White Hussars to have the Band playing
when their horses are being watered in the Lines. Only one tune is played, and
that tune never varies. I don't know its real name, but the White Hussars call
it:--"Take me to London again." It sounds very pretty. The Regiment would
sooner be struck off the roster than forego their distinction.

After the "dismiss" was sounded, the officers rode off home to prepare for
stables; and the men filed into the lines, riding easy.

That is to say, they opened their tight buttons, shifted their helmets, and
began to joke or to swear as the humor took them; the more careful slipping off
and easing girths and curbs. A good trooper values his mount exactly as much as
he values himself, and believes, or should believe, that the two together are
irresistible where women or men, girls or guns, are concerned.

Then the Orderly-Officer gave the order:--"Water horses," and the Regiment
loafed off to the squadron-troughs, which were in rear of the stables and
between these and the barracks. There were four huge troughs, one for each
squadron, arranged en echelon, so that the whole Regiment could water in ten
minutes if it liked. But it lingered for seventeen, as a rule, while the Band
played.

The band struck up as the squadrons filed off the troughs and the men slipped
their feet out of the stirrups and chaffed each other.

The sun was just setting in a big, hot bed of red cloud, and the road to the
Civil Lines seemed to run straight into the sun's eye.

There was a little dot on the road. It grew and grew till it showed as a horse,
with a sort of gridiron thing on his back. The red cloud glared through the
bars of the gridiron. Some of the troopers shaded their eyes with their hands
and said:--"What the mischief as that there 'orse got on 'im!"

In another minute they heard a neigh that every soul--horse and man--in the
Regiment knew, and saw, heading straight towards the Band, the dead Drum-Horse
of the White Hussars!

On his withers banged and bumped the kettle-drums draped in crape, and on his
back, very stiff and soldierly, sat a bare-headed skeleton.

The band stopped playing, and, for a moment, there was a hush.

Then some one in E troop--men said it was the Troop-Sergeant-Major--swung his
horse round and yelled. No one can account exactly for what happened
afterwards; but it seems that, at least, one man in each troop set an example
of panic, and the rest followed like sheep. The horses that had barely put
their muzzles into the trough's reared and capered; but, as soon as the Band
broke, which it did when the ghost of the Drum-Horse was about a furlong
distant, all hooves followed suit, and the clatter of the stampede--quite
different from the orderly throb and roar of a movement on parade, or the rough
horse-play of watering in camp--made them only more terrified. They felt that
the men on their backs were afraid of something. When horses once know THAT,
all is over except the butchery.

Troop after troop turned from the troughs and ran--anywhere, and everywhere--
like spilt quicksilver. It was a most extraordinary spectacle, for men and
horses were in all stages of easiness, and the carbine-buckets flopping against
their sides urged the horses on. Men were shouting and cursing, and trying to
pull clear of the Band which was being chased by the Drum-Horse whose rider had
fallen forward and seemed to be spurring for a wager.

The Colonel had gone over to the Mess for a drink. Most of the officers were
with him, and the Subaltern of the Day was preparing to go down to the lines,
and receive the watering reports from the Troop-Sergeant Majors. When "Take me
to London again" stopped, after twenty bars, every one in the Mess said:--"What
on earth has happened?" A minute later, they heard unmilitary noises, and saw,
far across the plain, the White Hussars scattered, and broken, and flying.

The Colonel was speechless with rage, for he thought that the Regiment had
risen against him or was unanimously drunk. The Band, a disorganized mob, tore
past, and at its heels labored the Drum-Horse--the dead and buried Drum-Horse--
with the jolting, clattering skeleton. Hogan-Yale whispered softly to Martyn:--
"No wire will stand that treatment," and the Band, which had doubled like a
hare, came back again. But the rest of the Regiment was gone, was rioting all
over the Province, for the dusk had shut in and each man was howling to his
neighbor that the Drum-Horse was on his flank.

Troop-Horses are far too tenderly treated as a rule. They can, on emergencies,
do a great deal, even with seventeen stone on their backs. As the troopers
found out.

How long this panic lasted I cannot say. I believe that when the moon rose the
men saw they had nothing to fear, and, by twos and threes and half-troops,
crept back into Cantonments very much ashamed of themselves. Meantime, the
Drum-Horse, disgusted at his treatment by old friends, pulled up, wheeled
round, and trotted up to the Mess verandah-steps for bread. No one liked to
run; but no one cared to go forward till the Colonel made a movement and laid
hold of the skeleton's foot. The Band had halted some distance away, and now
came back slowly. The Colonel called it, individually and collectively, every
evil name that occurred to him at the time; for he had set his hand on the
bosom of the Drum-Horse and found flesh and blood. Then he beat the kettle-
drums with his clenched fist, and discovered that they were but made of
silvered paper and bamboo. Next, still swearing, he tried to drag the skeleton
out of the saddle, but found that it had been wired into the cantle. The sight
of the Colonel, with his arms round the skeleton's pelvis and his knee in the
old Drum-Horse's stomach, was striking. Not to say amusing. He worried the
thing off in a minute or two, and threw it down on the ground, saying to the
Band:--"Here, you curs, that's what you're afraid of." The skeleton did not
look pretty in the twilight. The Band-Sergeant seemed to recognize it, for he
began to chuckle and choke. "Shall I take it away, sir?" said the Band-
Sergeant. "Yes," said the Colonel, "take it to Hell, and ride there
yourselves!"

The Band-Sergeant saluted, hoisted the skeleton across his saddle-bow, and led
off to the stables. Then the Colonel began to make inquiries for the rest of
the Regiment, and the language he used was wonderful. He would disband the
Regiment--he would court-martial every soul in it--he would not command such a
set of rabble, and so on, and so on. As the men dropped in, his language grew
wilder, until at last it exceeded the utmost limits of free speech allowed even
to a Colonel of Horse.

Martyn took Hogan-Yale aside and suggested compulsory retirement from the
service as a necessity when all was discovered. Martyn was the weaker man of
the two, Hogan-Yale put up his eyebrows and remarked, firstly, that he was the
son of a Lord, and secondly, that he was as innocent as the babe unborn of the
theatrical resurrection of the Drum-Horse.

"My instructions," said Yale, with a singularly sweet smile, "were that the
Drum-Horse should be sent back as impressively as possible.

I ask you, AM I responsible if a mule-headed friend sends him back in such a
manner as to disturb the peace of mind of a regiment of Her Majesty's Cavalry?"

Martyn said:--"you are a great man and will in time become a General; but I'd
give my chance of a troop to be safe out of this affair."

Providence saved Martyn and Hogan-Yale. The Second-in-Command led the Colonel
away to the little curtained alcove wherein the subalterns of the white Hussars
were accustomed to play poker of nights; and there, after many oaths on the
Colonel's part, they talked together in low tones. I fancy that the Second-in-
Command must have represented the scare as the work of some trooper whom it
would be hopeless to detect; and I know that he dwelt upon the sin and the
shame of making a public laughingstock of the scare.

"They will call us," said the Second-in-Command, who had really a fine
imagination, "they will call us the 'Fly-by-Nights'; they will call us the
'Ghost Hunters'; they will nickname us from one end of the Army list to the
other. All the explanations in the world won't make outsiders understand that
the officers were away when the panic began. For the honor of the Regiment and
for your own sake keep this thing quiet."

The Colonel was so exhausted with anger that soothing him down was not so
difficult as might be imagined. He was made to see, gently and by degrees, that
it was obviously impossible to court-martial the whole Regiment, and equally
impossible to proceed against any subaltern who, in his belief, had any concern
in the hoax.

"But the beast's alive! He's never been shot at all!" shouted the Colonel.
"It's flat, flagrant disobedience! I've known a man broke for less, d----d
sight less. They're mocking me, I tell you, Mutman! They're mocking me!"

Once more, the Second-in-Command set himself to sooth the Colonel, and wrestled
with him for half-an-hour. At the end of that time, the Regimental Sergeant-
Major reported himself. The situation was rather novel tell to him; but he was
not a man to be put out by circumstances. He saluted and said: "Regiment all
come back, Sir." Then, to propitiate the Colonel:--"An' none of the horses any
the worse, Sir."

The Colonel only snorted and answered:--"You'd better tuck the men into their
cots, then, and see that they don't wake up and cry in the night." The Sergeant
withdrew.

His little stroke of humor pleased the Colonel, and, further, he felt slightly
ashamed of the language he had been using. The Second-in-Command worried him
again, and the two sat talking far into the night.

Next day but one, there was a Commanding Officer's parade, and the Colonel
harangued the White Hussars vigorously. The pith of his speech was that, since
the Drum-Horse in his old age had proved himself capable of cutting up the
Whole Regiment, he should return to his post of pride at the head of the band,
BUT the Regiment were a set of ruffians with bad consciences.

The White Hussars shouted, and threw everything movable about them into the
air, and when the parade was over, they cheered the Colonel till they couldn't
speak. No cheers were put up for Lieutenant Hogan-Yale, who smiled very sweetly
in the background.

Said the Second-in-Command to the Colonel, unofficially:--"These little things
ensure popularity, and do not the least affect discipline."

"But I went back on my word," said the Colonel.

"Never mind," said the Second-in-Command. "The White Hussars will follow you
anywhere from today. Regiments are just like women. They will do anything for
trinketry."

A week later, Hogan-Yale received an extraordinary letter from some one who
signed himself "Secretary Charity and Zeal, 3709, E. C.," and asked for "the
return of our skeleton which we have reason to believe is in your possession."

"Who the deuce is this lunatic who trades in bones?" said Hogan-Yale.

"Beg your pardon, Sir," said the Band-Sergeant, "but the skeleton is with me,
an' I'll return it if you'll pay the carriage into the Civil Lines. There's a
coffin with it, Sir."

Hogan-Yale smiled and handed two rupees to the Band-Sergeant, saying:--"Write
the date on the skull, will you?"

If you doubt this story, and know where to go, you can see the date on the
skeleton. But don't mention the matter to the White Hussars.

I happen to know something about it, because I prepared the Drum-Horse for his
resurrection. He did not take kindly to the skeleton at all.



THE BRONCKHORST DIVORCE-CASE.

 In the daytime, when she moved about me,
  In the night, when she was sleeping at my side,--
 I was wearied, I was wearied of her presence.

 Day by day and night by night I grew to hate her--
  Would to God that she or I had died!
             --Confessions.

There was a man called Bronckhorst--a three-cornered, middle-aged man in the
Army--gray as a badger, and, some people said, with a touch of country-blood in
him. That, however, cannot be proved.

Mrs. Bronckhorst was not exactly young, though fifteen years younger than her
husband. She was a large, pale, quiet woman, with heavy eyelids, over weak
eyes, and hair that turned red or yellow as the lights fell on it.

Bronckhorst was not nice in any way. He had no respect for the pretty public
and private lies that make life a little less nasty than it is. His manner
towards his wife was coarse. There are many things--including actual assault
with the clenched fist--that a wife will endure; but seldom a wife can bear--as
Mrs. Bronckhorst bore--with a long course of brutal, hard chaff, making light
of her weaknesses, her headaches, her small fits of gaiety, her dresses, her
queer little attempts to make herself attractive to her husband when she knows
that she is not what she has been, and--worst of all--the love that she spends
on her children. That particular sort of heavy-handed jest was specially dear
to Bronckhorst. I suppose that he had first slipped into it, meaning no harm,
in the honeymoon, when folk find their ordinary stock of endearments run short,
and so go to the other extreme to express their feelings. A similar impulse
makes a man say:--"Hutt, you old beast!" when a favorite horse nuzzles his
coat-front. Unluckily, when the reaction of marriage sets in, the form of
speech remains, and, the tenderness having died out, hurts the wife more than
she cares to say. But Mrs. Bronckhorst was devoted to her "Teddy," as she
called him.

Perhaps that was why he objected to her. Perhaps--this is only a theory to
account for his infamous behavior later on--he gave way to the queer savage
feeling that sometimes takes by the throat a husband twenty years' married,
when he sees, across the table, the same face of his wedded wife, and knows
that, as he has sat facing it, so must he continue to sit until day of its
death or his own.

Most men and all women know the spasm. It only lasts for three breaths as a
rule, must be a "throw-back" to times when men and women were rather worse than
they are now, and is too unpleasant to be discussed.

Dinner at the Bronckhorst's was an infliction few men cared to undergo.
Bronckhorst took a pleasure in saying things that made his wife wince. When
their little boy came in at dessert, Bronckhorst used to give him half a glass
of wine, and naturally enough, the poor little mite got first riotous, next
miserable, and was removed screaming. Bronckhorst asked if that was the way
Teddy usually behaved, and whether Mrs. Bronckhorst could not spare some of her
time to teach the "little beggar decency." Mrs. Bronckhorst, who loved the boy
more than her own life, tried not to cry--her spirit seemed to have been broken
by her marriage. Lastly, Bronckhorst used to say:--"There! That'll do, that'll
do. For God's sake try to behave like a rational woman. Go into the drawing-
room." Mrs. Bronckhorst would go, trying to carry it all off with a smile; and
the guest of the evening would feel angry and uncomfortable.

After three years of this cheerful life--for Mrs. Bronckhorst had no woman-
friends to talk to--the Station was startled by the news that Bronckhorst had
instituted proceedings ON THE CRIMINAL COUNT, against a man called Biel, who
certainly had been rather attentive to Mrs. Bronckhorst whenever she had
appeared in public. The utter want of reserve with which Bronckhorst treated
his own dishonor helped us to know that the evidence against Biel would be
entirely circumstantial and native. There were no letters; but Bronckhorst said
openly that he would rack Heaven and Earth until he saw Biel superintending the
manufacture of carpets in the Central Jail. Mrs. Bronckhorst kept entirely to
her house, and let charitable folks say what they pleased. Opinions were
divided. Some two-thirds of the Station jumped at once to the conclusion that
Biel was guilty; but a dozen men who knew and liked him held by him. Biel was
furious and surprised. He denied the whole thing, and vowed that he would
thrash Bronckhorst within an inch of his life. No jury, we knew, could convict
a man on the criminal count on native evidence in a land where you can buy a
murder-charge, including the corpse, all complete for fifty-four rupees; but
Biel did not care to scrape through by the benefit of a doubt. He wanted the
whole thing cleared: but as he said one night:--"He can prove anything with
servants' evidence, and I've only my bare word." This was about a month before
the case came on; and beyond agreeing with Biel, we could do little. All that
we could be sure of was that the native evidence would be bad enough to blast
Biel's character for the rest of his service; for when a native begins perjury
he perjures himself thoroughly. He does not boggle over details.

Some genius at the end of the table whereat the affair was being talked over,
said:--"Look here! I don't believe lawyers are any good. Get a man to wire to
Strickland, and beg him to come down and pull us through."

Strickland was about a hundred and eighty miles up the line. He had not long
been married to Miss Youghal, but he scented in the telegram a chance of return
to the old detective work that his soul lusted after, and next night he came in
and heard our story. He finished his pipe and said oracularly:--"We must get at
the evidence. Oorya bearer, Mussalman khit and methraniayah, I suppose, are the
pillars of the charge. I am on in this piece; but I'm afraid I'm getting rusty
in my talk."

He rose and went into Biel's bedroom where his trunk had been put, and shut the
door. An hour later, we heard him say:--"I hadn't the heart to part with my old
makeups when I married. Will this do?" There was a lothely faquir salaaming in
the doorway.

"Now lend me fifty rupees," said Strickland, "and give me your Words of Honor
that you won't tell my Wife."

He got all that he asked for, and left the house while the table drank his
health. What he did only he himself knows. A faquir hung about Bronckhorst's
compound for twelve days. Then a mehter appeared, and when Biel heard of HIM,
he said that Strickland was an angel full-fledged. Whether the mehter made love
to Janki, Mrs. Bronckhorst's ayah, is a question which concerns Strickland
exclusively.

He came back at the end of three weeks, and said quietly:--"You spoke the
truth, Biel. The whole business is put up from beginning to end. Jove! It
almost astonishes ME! That Bronckhorst-beast isn't fit to live."

There was uproar and shouting, and Biel said:--"How are you going to prove it?
You can't say that you've been trespassing on Bronckhorst's compound in
disguise!"

"No," said Strickland. "Tell your lawyer-fool, whoever he is, to get up
something strong about 'inherent improbabilities' and 'discrepancies of
evidence.' He won't have to speak, but it will make him happy. I'M going to run
this business."

Biel held his tongue, and the other men waited to see what would happen. They
trusted Strickland as men trust quiet men. When the case came off the Court was
crowded. Strickland hung about in the verandah of the Court, till he met the
Mohammedan khitmatgar. Then he murmured a faquir's blessing in his ear, and
asked him how his second wife did. The man spun round, and, as he looked into
the eyes of "Estreeken Sahib," his jaw dropped. You must remember that before
Strickland was married, he was, as I have told you already, a power among
natives. Strickland whispered a rather coarse vernacular proverb to the effect
that he was abreast of all that was going on, and went into the Court armed
with a gut trainer's-whip.

The Mohammedan was the first witness and Strickland beamed upon him from the
back of the Court. The man moistened his lips with his tongue and, in his
abject fear of "Estreeken Sahib" the faquir, went back on every detail of his
evidence--said he was a poor man and God was his witness that he had forgotten
every thing that Bronckhorst Sahib had told him to say. Between his terror of
Strickland, the Judge, and Bronckhorst he collapsed, weeping.

Then began the panic among the witnesses. Janki, the ayah, leering chastely
behind her veil, turned gray, and the bearer left the Court. He said that his
Mamma was dying and that it was not wholesome for any man to lie unthriftily in
the presence of "Estreeken Sahib."

Biel said politely to Bronckhorst:--"Your witnesses don't seem to work. Haven't
you any forged letters to produce?" But Bronckhorst was swaying to and fro in
his chair, and there was a dead pause after Biel had been called to order.

Bronckhorst's Counsel saw the look on his client's face, and without more ado,
pitched his papers on the little green baize table, and mumbled something about
having been misinformed. The whole Court applauded wildly, like soldiers at a
theatre, and the Judge began to say what he thought.
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

Biel came out of the place, and Strickland dropped a gut trainer's-whip in the
verandah. Ten minutes later, Biel was cutting Bronckhorst into ribbons behind
the old Court cells, quietly and without scandal. What was left of Bronckhorst
was sent home in a carriage; and his wife wept over it and nursed it into a man
again.

Later on, after Biel had managed to hush up the counter-charge against
Bronckhorst of fabricating false evidence, Mrs. Bronckhorst, with her faint
watery smile, said that there had been a mistake, but it wasn't her Teddy's
fault altogether. She would wait till her Teddy came back to her. Perhaps he
had grown tired of her, or she had tried his patience, and perhaps we wouldn't
cut her any more, and perhaps the mothers would let their children play with
"little Teddy" again. He was so lonely. Then the Station invited Mrs.
Bronckhorst everywhere, until Bronckhorst was fit to appear in public, when he
went Home and took his wife with him. According to the latest advices, her
Teddy did "come back to her," and they are moderately happy. Though, of course,
he can never forgive her the thrashing that she was the indirect means of
getting for him.
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

What Biel wants to know is:--"Why didn't I press home the charge against the
Bronckhorst-brute, and have him run in?"

What Mrs. Strickland wants to know is:--"How DID my husband bring such a
lovely, lovely Waler from your Station? I know ALL his money-affairs; and I'm
CERTAIN he didn't BUY it."

What I want to know is:--How do women like Mrs. Bronckhorst come to marry men
like Bronckhorst?"

And my conundrum is the most unanswerable of the three.



VENUS ANNODOMINI.

 And the years went on as the years must do;
 But our great Diana was always new--
 Fresh, and blooming, and blonde, and fair,
 With azure eyes and with aureate hair;
 And all the folk, as they came or went,
 Offered her praise to her heart's content.
            --Diana of Ephesus.

She had nothing to do with Number Eighteen in the Braccio Nuovo of the Vatican,
between Visconti's Ceres and the God of the Nile. She was purely an Indian
deity--an Anglo-Indian deity, that is to say--and we called her THE Venus
Annodomini, to distinguish her from other Annodominis of the same everlasting
order. There was a legend among the Hills that she had once been young; but no
living man was prepared to come forward and say boldly that the legend was
true.

Men rode up to Simla, and stayed, and went away and made their name and did
their life's work, and returned again to find the Venus Annodomini exactly as
they had left her. She was as immutable as the Hills. But not quite so green.
All that a girl of eighteen could do in the way of riding, walking, dancing,
picnicking and over-exertion generally, the Venus Annodomini did, and showed no
sign of fatigue or trace of weariness. Besides perpetual youth, she had
discovered, men said, the secret of perpetual health; and her fame spread about
the land. From a mere woman, she grew to be an Institution, insomuch that no
young man could be said to be properly formed, who had not, at some time or
another, worshipped at the shrine of the Venus Annodomini. There was no one
like her, though there were many imitations. Six years in her eyes were no more
than six months to ordinary women; and ten made less visible impression on her
than does a week's fever on an ordinary woman. Every one adored her, and in
return she was pleasant and courteous to nearly every one. Youth had been a
habit of hers for so long, that she could not part with it--never realized, in
fact, the necessity of parting with it--and took for her more chosen associates
young people.

Among the worshippers of the Venus Annodomini was young Gayerson.

"Very Young" Gayerson, he was called to distinguish him from his father "Young"
Gayerson, a Bengal Civilian, who affected the customs--as he had the heart--of
youth. "Very Young" Gayerson was not content to worship placidly and for form's
sake, as the other young men did, or to accept a ride or a dance, or a talk
from the Venus Annodomini in a properly humble and thankful spirit. He was
exacting, and, therefore, the Venus Annodomini repressed him. He worried
himself nearly sick in a futile sort of way over her; and his devotion and
earnestness made him appear either shy or boisterous or rude, as his mood might
vary, by the side of the older men who, with him, bowed before the Venus
Annodomini. She was sorry for him. He reminded her of a lad who, three-and-
twenty years ago, had professed a boundless devotion for her, and for whom in
return she had felt something more than a week's weakness. But that lad had
fallen away and married another woman less than a year after he had worshipped
her; and the Venus Annodomini had almost--not quite--forgotten his name. "Very
Young" Gayerson had the same big blue eyes and the same way of pouting his
underlip when he was excited or troubled. But the Venus Annodomini checked him
sternly none the less. Too much zeal was a thing that she did not approve of;
preferring instead, a tempered and sober tenderness.

"Very Young" Gayerson was miserable, and took no trouble to conceal his
wretchedness. He was in the Army--a Line regiment I think, but am not certain--
and, since his face was a looking-glass and his forehead an open book, by
reason of his innocence, his brothers in arms made his life a burden to him and
embittered his naturally sweet disposition. No one except "Very Young"
Gayerson, and he never told his views, knew how old "Very Young" Gayerson
believed the Venus Annodomini to be. Perhaps he thought her five and twenty, or
perhaps she told him that she was this age. "Very Young" Gayerson would have
forded the Gugger in flood to carry her lightest word, and had implicit faith
in her. Every one liked him, and every one was sorry when they saw him so bound
a slave of the Venus Annodomini. Every one, too, admitted that it was not her
fault; for the Venus Annodomini differed from Mrs. Hauksbee and Mrs. Reiver in
this particular--she never moved a finger to attract any one; but, like Ninon
de l'Enclos, all men were attracted to her. One could admire and respect Mrs.
Hauksbee, despise and avoid Mrs. Reiver, but one was forced to adore the Venus
Annodomini.

"Very Young" Gayerson's papa held a Division or a Collectorate or something
administrative in a particularly unpleasant part of Bengal--full of Babus who
edited newspapers proving that "Young" Gayerson was a "Nero" and a "Scylla" and
a "Charybdis"; and, in addition to the Babus, there was a good deal of
dysentery and cholera abroad for nine months of the year. "Young" Gayerson--he
was about five and forty--rather liked Babus, they amused him, but he objects
to dysentery, and when he could get away, went to Darjiling for the most part.
This particular season he fancied that he would come up to Simla, and see his
boy. The boy was not altogether pleased. He told the Venus Annodomini that his
father was coming up, and she flushed a little and said that she should be
delighted to make his acquaintance. Then she looked long and thoughtfully at
"Very Young" Gayerson; because she was very, very sorry for him, and he was a
very, very big idiot.

"My daughter is coming out in a fortnight, Mr. Gayerson," she said.

"Your WHAT?" said he.

"Daughter," said the Venus Annodomini. "She's been out for a year at Home
already, and I want her to see a little of India. She is nineteen and a very
sensible, nice girl I believe."

"Very Young" Gayerson, who was a short twenty-two years old, nearly fell out of
his chair with astonishment; for he had persisted in believing, against all
belief, in the youth of the Venus Annodomini.

 She, with her back to the curtained window, watched the effect of her
sentences and smiled.

"Very Young" Gayerson's papa came up twelve days later, and had not been in
Simla four and twenty hours, before two men, old acquaintances of his, had told
him how "Very Young" Gayerson had been conducting himself.

"Young" Gayerson laughed a good deal, and inquired who the Venus Annodomini
might be. Which proves that he had been living in Bengal where nobody knows
anything except the rate of Exchange. Then he said "boys will be boys," and
spoke to his son about the matter.

"Very Young" Gayerson said that he felt wretched and unhappy; and "Young"
Gayerson said that he repented of having helped to bring a fool into the world.
He suggested that his son had better cut his leave short and go down to his
duties. This led to an unfilial answer, and relations were strained, until
"Young" Gayerson demanded that they should call on the Venus Annodomini. "Very
Young" Gayerson went with his papa, feeling, somehow, uncomfortable and small.

The Venus Annodomini received them graciously and "Young" Gayerson said:--"By
Jove! It's Kitty!" "Very Young" Gayerson would have listened for an
explanation, if his time had not been taken up with trying to talk to a large,
handsome, quiet, well-dressed girl--introduced to him by the Venus Annodomini
as her daughter. She was far older in manners, style and repose than "Very
Young" Gayerson; and, as he realized this thing, he felt sick.

Presently, he heard the Venus Annodomini saying:--"Do you know that your son is
one of my most devoted admirers?"

"I don't wonder," said "Young" Gayerson. Here he raised his voice:--"He follows
his father's footsteps. Didn't I worship the ground you trod on, ever so long
ago, Kitty--and you haven't changed since then. How strange it all seems!"

"Very Young" Gayerson said nothing. His conversation with the daughter of the
Venus Annodomini was, through the rest of the call, fragmentary and disjointed.
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

"At five, tomorrow then," said the Venus Annodomini. "And mind you are
punctual."

"At five punctual," said "Young" Gayerson. "You can lend your old father a
horse I dare say, youngster, can't you? I'm going for a ride tomorrow
afternoon."

"Certainly," said "Very Young" Gayerson. "I am going down tomorrow morning. My
ponies are at your service, Sir."

The Venus Annodomini looked at him across the half-light of the room, and her
big gray eyes filled with moisture. She rose and shook hands with him.

"Goodbye, Tom," whispered the Venus Annodomini.



 THE BISARA OF POOREE.

 Little Blind Fish, thou art marvellous wise,
 Little Blind Fish, who put out thy eyes?
 Open thine ears while I whisper my wish--
 Bring me a lover, thou little Blind Fish.
        --The Charm of the Bisara.

Some natives say that it came from the other side of Kulu, where the eleven-
inch Temple Sapphire is. Others that it was made at the Devil-Shrine of Ao-
Chung in Thibet, was stolen by a Kafir, from him by a Gurkha, from him again by
a Lahouli, from him by a khitmatgar, and by this latter sold to an Englishman,
so all its virtue was lost: because, to work properly, the Bisara of Pooree
must be stolen--with bloodshed if possible, but, at any rate, stolen.

These stories of the coming into India are all false. It was made at Pooree
ages since--the manner of its making would fill a small book--was stolen by one
of the Temple dancing-girls there, for her own purposes, and then passed on
from hand to hand, steadily northward, till it reached Hanla: always bearing
the same name--the Bisara of Pooree. In shape it is a tiny, square box of
silver, studded outside with eight small balas-rubies. Inside the box, which
opens with a spring, is a little eyeless fish, carved from some sort of dark,
shiny nut and wrapped in a shred of faded gold-cloth. That is the Bisara of
Pooree, and it were better for a man to take a king cobra in his hand than to
touch the Bisara of Pooree.

All kinds of magic are out of date and done away with except in India where
nothing changes in spite of the shiny, toy-scum stuff that people call
"civilization." Any man who knows about the Bisara of Pooree will tell you what
its powers are--always supposing that it has been honestly stolen. It is the
only regularly working, trustworthy love-charm in the country, with one
exception.

[The other charm is in the hands of a trooper of the Nizam's Horse, at a place
called Tuprani, due north of Hyderabad.] This can be depended upon for a fact.
Some one else may explain it.

If the Bisara be not stolen, but given or bought or found, it turns against its
owner in three years, and leads to ruin or death. This is another fact which
you may explain when you have time.

Meanwhile, you can laugh at it. At present, the Bisara is safe on an ekka-
pony's neck, inside the blue bead-necklace that keeps off the Evil-eye. If the
ekka-driver ever finds it, and wears it, or gives it to his wife, I am sorry
for him.

A very dirty hill-cooly woman, with goitre, owned it at Theog in 1884. It came
into Simla from the north before Churton's khitmatgar bought it, and sold it,
for three times its silver-value, to Churton, who collected curiosities. The
servant knew no more what he had bought than the master; but a man looking over
Churton's collection of curiosities--Churton was an Assistant Commissioner by
the way--saw and held his tongue. He was an Englishman; but knew how to
believe. Which shows that he was different from most Englishmen. He knew that
it was dangerous to have any share in the little box when working or dormant;
for unsought Love is a terrible gift.

Pack--"Grubby" Pack, as we used to call him--was, in every way, a nasty little
man who must have crawled into the Army by mistake. He was three inches taller
than his sword, but not half so strong. And the sword was a fifty-shilling,
tailor-made one. Nobody liked him, and, I suppose, it was his wizenedness and
worthlessness that made him fall so hopelessly in love with Miss Hollis, who
was good and sweet, and five foot seven in her tennis shoes. He was not content
with falling in love quietly, but brought all the strength of his miserable
little nature into the business. If he had not been so objectionable, one might
have pitied him. He vapored, and fretted, and fumed, and trotted up and down,
and tried to make himself pleasing in Miss Hollis's big, quiet, gray eyes, and
failed. It was one of the cases that you sometimes meet, even in this country
where we marry by Code, of a really blind attachment all on one side, without
the faintest possibility of return. Miss Hollis looked on Pack as some sort of
vermin running about the road. He had no prospects beyond Captain's pay, and no
wits to help that out by one anna. In a large-sized man, love like his would
have been touching.

In a good man it would have been grand. He being what he was, it was only a
nuisance.

You will believe this much. What you will not believe, is what follows:
Churton, and The Man who Knew that the Bisara was, were lunching at the Simla
Club together. Churton was complaining of life in general. His best mare had
rolled out of stable down the hill and had broken her back; his decisions were
being reversed by the upper Courts, more than an Assistant Commissioner of
eight years' standing has a right to expect; he knew liver and fever, and, for
weeks past, had felt out of sorts. Altogether, he was disgusted and
disheartened.

Simla Club dining-room is built, as all the world knows, in two sections, with
an arch-arrangement dividing them. Come in, turn to your own left, take the
table under the window, and you cannot see any one who has come in, turning to
the right, and taken a table on the right side of the arch. Curiously enough,
every word that you say can be heard, not only by the other diner, but by the
servants beyond the screen through which they bring dinner. This is worth
knowing: an echoing-room is a trap to be forewarned against.

Half in fun, and half hoping to be believed, The Man who Knew told Churton the
story of the Bisara of Pooree at rather greater length than I have told it to
you in this place; winding up with the suggestion that Churton might as well
throw the little box down the hill and see whether all his troubles would go
with it. In ordinary ears, English ears, the tale was only an interesting bit
of folk-lore. Churton laughed, said that he felt better for his tiffin, and
went out. Pack had been tiffining by himself to the right of the arch, and had
heard everything. He was nearly mad with his absurd infatuation for Miss Hollis
that all Simla had been laughing about.

It is a curious thing that, when a man hates or loves beyond reason, he is
ready to go beyond reason to gratify his feelings. Which he would not do for
money or power merely. Depend upon it, Solomon would never have built altars to
Ashtaroth and all those ladies with queer names, if there had not been trouble
of some kind in his zenana, and nowhere else. But this is beside the story. The
facts of the case are these: Pack called on Churton next day when Churton was
out, left his card, and STOLE the Bisara of Pooree from its place under the
clock on the mantelpiece! Stole it like the thief he was by nature. Three days
later, all Simla was electrified by the news that Miss Hollis had accepted
Pack--the shrivelled rat, Pack! Do you desire clearer evidence than this? The
Bisara of Pooree had been stolen, and it worked as it had always done when won
by foul means.

There are three or four times in a man's life when he is justified in meddling
with other people's affairs to play Providence.

The Man who Knew felt that he WAS justified; but believing and acting on a
belief are quite different things. The insolent satisfaction of Pack as he
ambled by the side of Miss Hollis, and Churton's striking release from liver,
as soon as the Bisara of Pooree had gone, decided the Man. He explained to
Churton and Churton laughed, because he was not brought up to believe that men
on the Government House List steal--at least little things. But the miraculous
acceptance by Miss Hollis of that tailor, Pack, decided him to take steps on
suspicion. He vowed that he only wanted to find out where his ruby-studded
silver box had vanished to. You cannot accuse a man on the Government House
List of stealing. And if you rifle his room you are a thief yourself. Churton,
prompted by The Man who Knew, decided on burglary. If he found nothing in
Pack's room . . . . but it is not nice to think of what would have happened in
that case.

Pack went to a dance at Benmore--Benmore WAS Benmore in those days, and not an
office--and danced fifteen waltzes out of twenty-two with Miss Hollis. Churton
and The Man took all the keys that they could lay hands on, and went to Pack's
room in the hotel, certain that his servants would be away. Pack was a cheap
soul. He had not purchased a decent cash-box to keep his papers in, but one of
those native imitations that you buy for ten rupees. It opened to any sort of
key, and there at the bottom, under Pack's Insurance Policy, lay the Bisara of
Pooree!

Churton called Pack names, put the Bisara of Pooree in his pocket, and went to
the dance with The Man. At least, he came in time for supper, and saw the
beginning of the end in Miss Hollis's eyes. She was hysterical after supper,
and was taken away by her Mamma.

At the dance, with the abominable Bisara in his pocket, Churton twisted his
foot on one of the steps leading down to the old Rink, and had to be sent home
in a rickshaw, grumbling. He did not believe in the Bisara of Pooree any the
more for this manifestation, but he sought out Pack and called him some ugly
names; and "thief" was the mildest of them. Pack took the names with the
nervous smile of a little man who wants both soul and body to resent an insult,
and went his way. There was no public scandal.

A week later, Pack got his definite dismissal from Miss Hollis.

There had been a mistake in the placing of her affections, she said.

So he went away to Madras, where he can do no great harm even if he lives to be
a Colonel.

Churton insisted upon The Man who Knew taking the Bisara of Pooree as a gift.
The Man took it, went down to the Cart Road at once, found an ekka pony with a
blue head-necklace, fastened the Bisara of Pooree inside the necklace with a
piece of shoe-string and thanked Heaven that he was rid of a danger. Remember,
in case you ever find it, that you must not destroy the Bisara of Pooree. I
have not time to explain why just now, but the power lies in the little wooden
fish. Mister Gubernatis or Max Muller could tell you more about it than I.

You will say that all this story is made up. Very well. If ever you come across
a little silver, ruby-studded box, seven-eighths of an inch long by three-
quarters wide, with a dark-brown wooden fish, wrapped in gold cloth, inside it,
keep it. Keep it for three years, and then you will discover for yourself
whether my story is true or false.

Better still, steal it as Pack did, and you will be sorry that you had not
killed yourself in the beginning.



THE GATE OF A HUNDRED SORROWS.

 "If I can attain Heaven for a pice, why should you be envious?"
          --Opium Smoker's Proverb.

This is no work of mine. My friend, Gabral Misquitta, the half-caste, spoke it
all, between moonset and morning, six weeks before he died; and I took it down
from his mouth as he answered my questions so:--

It lies between the Copper-smith's Gully and the pipe-stem sellers' quarter,
within a hundred yards, too, as the crow flies, of the Mosque of Wazir Khan. I
don't mind telling any one this much, but I defy him to find the Gate, however
well he may think he knows the City. You might even go through the very gully
it stands in a hundred times, and be none the wiser. We used to call the gully,
"the Gully of the Black Smoke," but its native name is altogether different of
course. A loaded donkey couldn't pass between the walls; and, at one point,
just before you reach the Gate, a bulged house-front makes people go along all
sideways.

It isn't really a gate though. It's a house. Old Fung-Tching had it first five
years ago. He was a boot-maker in Calcutta. They say that he murdered his wife
there when he was drunk. That was why he dropped bazar-rum and took to the
Black Smoke instead. Later on, he came up north and opened the Gate as a house
where you could get your smoke in peace and quiet. Mind you, it was a pukka,
respectable opium-house, and not one of those stifling, sweltering chandoo-
khanas, that you can find all over the City. No; the old man knew his business
thoroughly, and he was most clean for a Chinaman. He was a one-eyed little
chap, not much more than five feet high, and both his middle fingers were gone.
All the same, he was the handiest man at rolling black pills I have ever seen.
Never seemed to be touched by the Smoke, either; and what he took day and
night, night and day, was a caution. I've been at it five years, and I can do
my fair share of the Smoke with any one; but I was a child to Fung-Tching that
way. All the same, the old man was keen on his money, very keen; and that's
what I can't understand. I heard he saved a good deal before he died, but his
nephew has got all that now; and the old man's gone back to China to be buried.

He kept the big upper room, where his best customers gathered, as neat as a new
pin. In one corner used to stand Fung-Tching's Joss--almost as ugly as Fung-
Tching--and there were always sticks burning under his nose; but you never
smelt 'em when the pipes were going thick. Opposite the Joss was Fung-Tching's
coffin. He had spent a good deal of his savings on that, and whenever a new man
came to the Gate he was always introduced to it. It was lacquered black, with
red and gold writings on it, and I've heard that Fung-Tching brought it out all
the way from China. I don't know whether that's true or not, but I know that,
if I came first in the evening, I used to spread my mat just at the foot of it.
It was a quiet corner you see, and a sort of breeze from the gully came in at
the window now and then. Besides the mats, there was no other furniture in the
room--only the coffin, and the old Joss all green and blue and purple with age
and polish.

Fung-Tching never told us why he called the place "The Gate of a Hundred
Sorrows." (He was the only Chinaman I know who used bad-sounding fancy names.
Most of them are flowery. As you'll see in Calcutta.) We used to find that out
for ourselves. Nothing grows on you so much, if you're white, as the Black
Smoke. A yellow man is made different. Opium doesn't tell on him scarcely at
all; but white and black suffer a good deal. Of course, there are some people
that the Smoke doesn't touch any more than tobacco would at first. They just
doze a bit, as one would fall asleep naturally, and next morning they are
almost fit for work. Now, I was one of that sort when I began, but I've been at
it for five years pretty steadily, and its different now. There was an old aunt
of mine, down Agra way, and she left me a little at her death. About sixty
rupees a month secured. Sixty isn't much. I can recollect a time, seems
hundreds and hundreds of years ago, that I was getting my three hundred a
month, and pickings, when I was working on a big timber contract in Calcutta.

I didn't stick to that work for long. The Black Smoke does not allow of much
other business; and even though I am very little affected by it, as men go, I
couldn't do a day's work now to save my life. After all, sixty rupees is what I
want. When old Fung-Tching was alive he used to draw the money for me, give me
about half of it to live on (I eat very little), and the rest he kept himself.
I was free of the Gate at any time of the day and night, and could smoke and
sleep there when I liked, so I didn't care. I know the old man made a good
thing out of it; but that's no matter. Nothing matters, much to me; and,
besides, the money always came fresh and fresh each month.

There was ten of us met at the Gate when the place was first opened. Me, and
two Baboos from a Government Office somewhere in Anarkulli, but they got the
sack and couldn't pay (no man who has to work in the daylight can do the Black
Smoke for any length of time straight on); a Chinaman that was Fung-Tching's
nephew; a bazar-woman that had got a lot of money somehow; an English loafer--
Mac-Somebody I think, but I have forgotten--that smoked heaps, but never seemed
to pay anything (they said he had saved Fung-Tching's life at some trial in
Calcutta when he was a barrister): another Eurasian, like myself, from Madras;
a half-caste woman, and a couple of men who said they had come from the North.
I think they must have been Persians or Afghans or something. There are not
more than five of us living now, but we come regular. I don't know what
happened to the Baboos; but the bazar-woman she died after six months of the
Gate, and I think Fung-Tching took her bangles and nose-ring for himself. But
I'm not certain. The Englishman, he drank as well as smoked, and he dropped
off. One of the Persians got killed in a row at night by the big well near the
mosque a long time ago, and the Police shut up the well, because they said it
was full of foul air.

They found him dead at the bottom of it. So, you see, there is only me, the
Chinaman, the half-caste woman that we call the Memsahib (she used to live with
Fung-Tching), the other Eurasian, and one of the Persians. The Memsahib looks
very old now. I think she was a young woman when the Gate was opened; but we
are all old for the matter of that. Hundreds and hundreds of years old. It is
very hard to keep count of time in the Gate, and besides, time doesn't matter
to me. I draw my sixty rupees fresh and fresh every month.

A very, very long while ago, when I used to be getting three hundred and fifty
rupees a month, and pickings, on a big timber-contract at Calcutta, I had a
wife of sorts. But she's dead now. People said that I killed her by taking to
the Black Smoke. Perhaps I did, but it's so long since it doesn't matter.
Sometimes when I first came to the Gate, I used to feel sorry for it; but
that's all over and done with long ago, and I draw my sixty rupees fresh and
fresh every month, and am quite happy. Not DRUNK happy, you know, but always
quiet and soothed and contented.

How did I take to it? It began at Calcutta. I used to try it in my own house,
just to see what it was like. I never went very far, but I think my wife must
have died then. Anyhow, I found myself here, and got to know Fung-Tching. I
don't remember rightly how that came about; but he told me of the Gate and I
used to go there, and, somehow, I have never got away from it since. Mind you,
though, the Gate was a respectable place in Fung-Tching's time where you could
be comfortable, and not at all like the chandoo-khanas where the niggers go.
No; it was clean and quiet, and not crowded. Of course, there were others
beside us ten and the man; but we always had a mat apiece with a wadded woollen
head-piece, all covered with black and red dragons and things; just like a
coffin in the corner.

At the end of one's third pipe the dragons used to move about and fight. I've
watched 'em, many and many a night through. I used to regulate my Smoke that
way, and now it takes a dozen pipes to make 'em stir. Besides, they are all
torn and dirty, like the mats, and old Fung-Tching is dead. He died a couple of
years ago, and gave me the pipe I always use now--a silver one, with queer
beasts crawling up and down the receiver-bottle below the cup. Before that, I
think, I used a big bamboo stem with a copper cup, a very small one, and a
green jade mouthpiece. It was a little thicker than a walking-stick stem, and
smoked sweet, very sweet. The bamboo seemed to suck up the smoke. Silver
doesn't, and I've got to clean it out now and then, that's a great deal of
trouble, but I smoke it for the old man's sake. He must have made a good thing
out of me, but he always gave me clean mats and pillows, and the best stuff you
could get anywhere.

When he died, his nephew Tsin-ling took up the Gate, and he called it the
"Temple of the Three Possessions;" but we old ones speak of it as the "Hundred
Sorrows," all the same. The nephew does things very shabbily, and I think the
Memsahib must help him. She lives with him; same as she used to do with the old
man. The two let in all sorts of low people, niggers and all, and the Black
Smoke isn't as good as it used to be. I've found burnt bran in my pipe over and
over again. The old man would have died if that had happened in his time.
Besides, the room is never cleaned, and all the mats are torn and cut at the
edges. The coffin has gone--gone to China again--with the old man and two
ounces of smoke inside it, in case he should want 'em on the way.

The Joss doesn't get so many sticks burnt under his nose as he used to; that's
a sign of ill-luck, as sure as Death. He's all brown, too, and no one ever
attends to him. That's the Memsahib's work, I know; because, when Tsin-ling
tried to burn gilt paper before him, she said it was a waste of money, and, if
he kept a stick burning very slowly, the Joss wouldn't know the difference. So
now we've got the sticks mixed with a lot of glue, and they take half-an-hour
longer to burn, and smell stinky. Let alone the smell of the room by itself. No
business can get on if they try that sort of thing.

The Joss doesn't like it. I can see that. Late at night, sometimes, he turns
all sorts of queer colors--blue and green and red--just as he used to do when
old Fung-Tching was alive; and he rolls his eyes and stamps his feet like a
devil.

I don't know why I don't leave the place and smoke quietly in a little room of
my own in the bazar. Most like, Tsin-ling would kill me if I went away--he
draws my sixty rupees now--and besides, it's so much trouble, and I've grown to
be very fond of the Gate. It's not much to look at. Not what it was in the old
man's time, but I couldn't leave it. I've seen so many come in and out. And
I've seen so many die here on the mats that I should be afraid of dying in the
open now. I've seen some things that people would call strange enough; but
nothing is strange when you're on the Black Smoke, except the Black Smoke. And
if it was, it wouldn't matter.

Fung-Tching used to be very particular about his people, and never got in any
one who'd give trouble by dying messy and such. But the nephew isn't half so
careful. He tells everywhere that he keeps a "first-chop" house. Never tries to
get men in quietly, and make them comfortable like Fung-Tching did. That's why
the Gate is getting a little bit more known than it used to be. Among the
niggers of course. The nephew daren't get a white, or, for matter of that, a
mixed skin into the place. He has to keep us three of course--me and the
Memsahib and the other Eurasian. We're fixtures.

But he wouldn't give us credit for a pipeful--not for anything.

One of these days, I hope, I shall die in the Gate. The Persian and the Madras
man are terrible shaky now. They've got a boy to light their pipes for them. I
always do that myself. Most like, I shall see them carried out before me. I
don't think I shall ever outlive the Memsahib or Tsin-ling. Women last longer
than men at the Black-Smoke, and Tsin-ling has a deal of the old man's blood in
him, though he DOES smoke cheap stuff. The bazar-woman knew when she was going
two days before her time; and SHE died on a clean mat with a nicely wadded
pillow, and the old man hung up her pipe just above the Joss. He was always
fond of her, I fancy. But he took her bangles just the same.

I should like to die like the bazar-woman--on a clean, cool mat with a pipe of
good stuff between my lips. When I feel I'm going, I shall ask Tsin-ling for
them, and he can draw my sixty rupees a month, fresh and fresh, as long as he
pleases, and watch the black and red dragons have their last big fight
together; and then . . . .

Well, it doesn't matter. Nothing matters much to me--only I wished Tsin-ling
wouldn't put bran into the Black Smoke.



THE STORY OF MUHAMMAD DIN.

 "Who is the happy man? He that sees in his own house at home little children
crowned with dust, leaping and falling and crying."
           --Munichandra, translated by Professor Peterson.

The polo-ball was an old one, scarred, chipped, and dinted. It stood on the
mantelpiece among the pipe-stems which Imam Din, khitmatgar, was cleaning for
me.

"Does the Heaven-born want this ball?" said Imam Din, deferentially.

The Heaven-born set no particular store by it; but of what use was a polo-ball
to a khitmatgar?

"By Your Honor's favor, I have a little son. He has seen this ball, and desires
it to play with. I do not want it for myself."

No one would for an instant accuse portly old Imam Din of wanting to play with
polo-balls. He carried out the battered thing into the verandah; and there
followed a hurricane of joyful squeaks, a patter of small feet, and the thud-
thud-thud of the ball rolling along the ground. Evidently the little son had
been waiting outside the door to secure his treasure. But how had he managed to
see that polo-ball?

Next day, coming back from office half an hour earlier than usual, I was aware
of a small figure in the dining-room--a tiny, plump figure in a ridiculously
inadequate shirt which came, perhaps, half-way down the tubby stomach. It
wandered round the room, thumb in mouth, crooning to itself as it took stock of
the pictures. Undoubtedly this was the "little son."

He had no business in my room, of course; but was so deeply absorbed in his
discoveries that he never noticed me in the doorway. I stepped into the room
and startled him nearly into a fit. He sat down on the ground with a gasp. His
eyes opened, and his mouth followed suit. I knew what was coming, and fled,
followed by a long, dry howl which reached the servants' quarters far more
quickly than any command of mine had ever done. In ten seconds Imam Din was in
the dining-room. Then despairing sobs arose, and I returned to find Imam Din
admonishing the small sinner who was using most of his shirt as a handkerchief.

"This boy," said Imam Din, judicially, "is a budmash, a big budmash. He will,
without doubt, go to the jail-khana for his behavior." Renewed yells from the
penitent, and an elaborate apology to myself from Imam Din.

"Tell the baby," said I, "that the Sahib is not angry, and take him away." Imam
Din conveyed my forgiveness to the offender, who had now gathered all his shirt
round his neck, string-wise, and the yell subsided into a sob. The two set off
for the door. "His name," said Imam Din, as though the name were part of the
crime, "is Muhammad Din, and he is a budmash." Freed from present danger,
Muhammad Din turned round, in his father's arms, and said gravely:--"It is true
that my name is Muhammad Din, Tahib, but I am not a budmash. I am a MAN!"

From that day dated my acquaintance with Muhammad Din. Never again did he come
into my dining-room, but on the neutral ground of the compound, we greeted each
other with much state, though our conversation was confined to "Talaam, Tahib"
from his side and "Salaam Muhammad Din" from mine. Daily on my return from
office, the little white shirt, and the fat little body used to rise from the
shade of the creeper-covered trellis where they had been hid; and daily I
checked my horse here, that my salutation might not be slurred over or given
unseemly.

Muhammad Din never had any companions. He used to trot about the compound, in
and out of the castor-oil bushes, on mysterious errands of his own. One day I
stumbled upon some of his handiwork far down the ground. He had half buried the
polo-ball in dust, and stuck six shrivelled old marigold flowers in a circle
round it. Outside that circle again, was a rude square, traced out in bits of
red brick alternating with fragments of broken china; the whole bounded by a
little bank of dust. The bhistie from the well-curb put in a plea for the small
architect, saying that it was only the play of a baby and did not much
disfigure my garden.

Heaven knows that I had no intention of touching the child's work then or
later; but, that evening, a stroll through the garden brought me unawares full
on it; so that I trampled, before I knew, marigold-heads, dust-bank, and
fragments of broken soap-dish into confusion past all hope of mending. Next
morning I came upon Muhammad Din crying softly to himself over the ruin I had
wrought.

Some one had cruelly told him that the Sahib was very angry with him for
spoiling the garden, and had scattered his rubbish using bad language the
while. Muhammad Din labored for an hour at effacing every trace of the dust-
bank and pottery fragments, and it was with a tearful apologetic face that he
said, "Talaam Tahib," when I came home from the office. A hasty inquiry
resulted in Imam Din informing Muhammad Din that by my singular favor he was
permitted to disport himself as he pleased. Whereat the child took heart and
fell to tracing the ground-plan of an edifice which was to eclipse the
marigold-polo-ball creation.

For some months, the chubby little eccentricity revolved in his humble orbit
among the castor-oil bushes and in the dust; always fashioning magnificent
palaces from stale flowers thrown away by the bearer, smooth water-worn
pebbles, bits of broken glass, and feathers pulled, I fancy, from my fowls--
always alone and always crooning to himself.

A gayly-spotted sea-shell was dropped one day close to the last of his little
buildings; and I looked that Muhammad Din should build something more than
ordinarily splendid on the strength of it. Nor was I disappointed. He meditated
for the better part of an hour, and his crooning rose to a jubilant song. Then
he began tracing in dust. It would certainly be a wondrous palace, this one,
for it was two yards long and a yard broad in ground-plan. But the palace was
never completed.

Next day there was no Muhammad Din at the head of the carriage- drive, and no
"Talaam Tahib" to welcome my return. I had grown accustomed to the greeting,
and its omission troubled me. Next day, Imam Din told me that the child was
suffering slightly from fever and needed quinine. He got the medicine, and an
English Doctor.

"They have no stamina, these brats," said the Doctor, as he left Imam Din's
quarters.

A week later, though I would have given much to have avoided it, I met on the
road to the Mussulman burying-ground Imam Din, accompanied by one other friend,
carrying in his arms, wrapped in a white cloth, all that was left of little
Muhammad Din.



ON THE STRENGTH OF A LIKENESS.

 If your mirror be broken, look into still water; but have a care that you do
not fall in.
                  --Hindu Proverb.

Next to a requited attachment, one of the most convenient things that a young
man can carry about with him at the beginning of his career, is an unrequited
attachment. It makes him feel important and business-like, and blase, and
cynical; and whenever he has a touch of liver, or suffers from want of
exercise, he can mourn over his lost love, and be very happy in a tender,
twilight fashion.

Hannasyde's affair of the heart had been a Godsend to him. It was four years
old, and the girl had long since given up thinking of it.

She had married and had many cares of her own. In the beginning, she had told
Hannasyde that, "while she could never be anything more than a sister to him,
she would always take the deepest interest in his welfare." This startlingly
new and original remark gave Hannasyde something to think over for two years;
and his own vanity filled in the other twenty-four months. Hannasyde was quite
different from Phil Garron, but, none the less, had several points in common
with that far too lucky man.

He kept his unrequited attachment by him as men keep a well-smoked pipe--for
comfort's sake, and because it had grown dear in the using. It brought him
happily through the Simla season. Hannasyde was not lovely. There was a crudity
in his manners, and a roughness in the way in which he helped a lady on to her
horse, that did not attract the other sex to him. Even if he had cast about for
their favor, which he did not. He kept his wounded heart all to himself for a
while.

Then trouble came to him. All who go to Simla, know the slope from the
Telegraph to the Public Works Office. Hannasyde was loafing up the hill, one
September morning between calling hours, when a 'rickshaw came down in a hurry,
and in the 'rickshaw sat the living, breathing image of the girl who had made
him so happily unhappy.

Hannasyde leaned against the railing and gasped. He wanted to run downhill
after the 'rickshaw, but that was impossible; so he went forward with most of
his blood in his temples. It was impossible, for many reasons, that the woman
in the 'rickshaw could be the girl he had known. She was, he discovered later,
the wife of a man from Dindigul, or Coimbatore, or some out-of-the-way place,
and she had come up to Simla early in the season for the good of her health.

She was going back to Dindigul, or wherever it was, at the end of the season;
and in all likelihood would never return to Simla again, her proper Hill-
station being Ootacamund. That night, Hannasyde, raw and savage from the raking
up of all old feelings, took counsel with himself for one measured hour. What
he decided upon was this; and you must decide for yourself how much genuine
affection for the old love, and how much a very natural inclination to go
abroad and enjoy himself, affected the decision. Mrs. Landys-Haggert would
never in all human likelihood cross his path again. So whatever he did didn't
much matter. She was marvellously like the girl who "took a deep interest" and
the rest of the formula. All things considered, it would be pleasant to make
the acquaintance of Mrs. Landys-Haggert, and for a little time--only a very
little time--to make believe that he was with Alice Chisane again. Every one is
more or less mad on one point. Hannasyde's particular monomania was his old
love, Alice Chisane.

He made it his business to get introduced to Mrs. Haggert, and the introduction
prospered. He also made it his business to see as much as he could of that
lady. When a man is in earnest as to interviews, the facilities which Simla
offers are startling. There are garden-parties, and tennis-parties, and
picnics, and luncheons at Annandale, and rifle-matches, and dinners and balls;
besides rides and walks, which are matters of private arrangement.

Hannasyde had started with the intention of seeing a likeness, and he ended by
doing much more. He wanted to be deceived, he meant to be deceived, and he
deceived himself very thoroughly. Not only were the face and figure, the face
and figure of Alice Chisane, but the voice and lower tones were exactly the
same, and so were the turns of speech; and the little mannerisms, that every
woman has, of gait and gesticulation, were absolutely and identically the same.
The turn of the head was the same; the tired look in the eyes at the end of a
long walk was the same; the sloop and wrench over the saddle to hold in a
pulling horse was the same; and once, most marvellous of all, Mrs. Landys-
Haggert singing to herself in the next room, while Hannasyde was waiting to
take her for a ride, hummed, note for note, with a throaty quiver of the voice
in the second line:--"Poor Wandering One!" exactly as Alice Chisane had hummed
it for Hannasyde in the dusk of an English drawing-room. In the actual woman
herself--in the soul of her--there was not the least likeness; she and Alice
Chisane being cast in different moulds. But all that Hannasyde wanted to know
and see and think about, was this maddening and perplexing likeness of face and
voice and manner. He was bent on making a fool of himself that way; and he was
in no sort disappointed.

Open and obvious devotion from any sort of man is always pleasant to any sort
of woman; but Mrs. Landys-Haggert, being a woman of the world, could make
nothing of Hannasyde's admiration.

He would take any amount of trouble--he was a selfish man habitually--to meet
and forestall, if possible, her wishes.

Anything she told him to do was law; and he was, there could be no doubting it,
fond of her company so long as she talked to him, and kept on talking about
trivialities. But when she launched into expression of her personal views and
her wrongs, those small social differences that make the spice of Simla life,
Hannasyde was neither pleased nor interested. He didn't want to know anything
about Mrs. Landys-Haggert, or her experiences in the past--she had travelled
nearly all over the world, and could talk cleverly--he wanted the likeness of
Alice Chisane before his eyes and her voice in his ears.

Anything outside that, reminding him of another personality jarred, and he
showed that it did.

Under the new Post Office, one evening, Mrs. Landys-Haggert turned on him, and
spoke her mind shortly and without warning. "Mr. Hannasyde," said she, "will
you be good enough to explain why you have appointed yourself my special
cavalier servente? I don't understand it. But I am perfectly certain, somehow
or other, that you don't care the least little bit in the world for ME." This
seems to support, by the way, the theory that no man can act or tell lies to a
woman without being found out. Hannasyde was taken off his guard. His defence
never was a strong one, because he was always thinking of himself, and he
blurted out, before he knew what he was saying, this inexpedient answer:--"No
more I do."

The queerness of the situation and the reply, made Mrs. Haggert laugh. Then it
all came out; and at the end of Hannasyde's lucid explanation, Mrs. Haggert
said, with the least little touch of scorn in her voice:--"So I'm to act as the
lay-figure for you to hang the rags of your tattered affections on, am I?"

Hannasyde didn't see what answer was required, and he devoted himself generally
and vaguely to the praise of Alice Chisane, which was unsatisfactory. Now it is
to be thoroughly made clear that Mrs. Haggert had not the shadow of a ghost of
an interest in Hannasyde.

Only--only no woman likes being made love through instead of to--specially on
behalf of a musty divinity of four years' standing.

Hannasyde did not see that he had made any very particular exhibition of
himself. He was glad to find a sympathetic soul in the arid wastes of Simla.

When the season ended, Hannasyde went down to his own place and Mrs. Haggert to
hers. "It was like making love to a ghost," said Hannasyde to himself, "and it
doesn't matter; and now I'll get to my work." But he found himself thinking
steadily of the Haggert-Chisane ghost; and he could not be certain whether it
was Haggert or Chisane that made up the greater part of the pretty phantom.
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

He got understanding a month later.

A peculiar point of this peculiar country is the way in which a heartless
Government transfers men from one end of the Empire to the other. You can never
be sure of getting rid of a friend or an enemy till he or she dies. There was a
case once--but that's another story.

Haggert's Department ordered him up from Dindigul to the Frontier at two days'
notice, and he went through, losing money at every step, from Dindigul to his
station. He dropped Mrs. Haggert at Lucknow, to stay with some friends there,
to take part in a big ball at the Chutter Munzil, and to come on when he had
made the new home a little comfortable. Lucknow was Hannasyde's station, and
Mrs. Haggert stayed a week there. Hannasyde went to meet her. And the train
came in, he discovered which he had been thinking of for the past month. The
unwisdom of his conduct also struck him. The Lucknow week, with two dances, and
an unlimited quantity of rides together, clinched matters; and Hannasyde found
himself pacing this circle of thought:--He adored Alice Chisane--at least he
HAD adored her. AND he admired Mrs. Landys-Haggert because she was like Alice
Chisane. BUT Mrs. Landys-Haggert was not in the least like Alice Chisane, being
a thousand times more adorable. NOW Alice Chisane was "the bride of another,"
and so was Mrs. Landys-Haggert, and a good and honest wife too. THEREFORE, he,
Hannasyde, was . . . . here he called himself several hard names, and wished
that he had been wise in the beginning.

Whether Mrs. Landys-Haggert saw what was going on in his mind, she alone knows.
He seemed to take an unqualified interest in everything connected with herself,
as distinguished from the Alice-Chisane likeness, and he said one or two things
which, if Alice Chisane had been still betrothed to him, could scarcely have
been excused, even on the grounds of the likeness. But Mrs. Haggert turned the
remarks aside, and spent a long time in making Hannasyde see what a comfort and
a pleasure she had been to him because of her strange resemblance to his old
love. Hannasyde groaned in his saddle and said, "Yes, indeed," and busied
himself with preparations for her departure to the Frontier, feeling very small
and miserable.

The last day of her stay at Lucknow came, and Hannasyde saw her off at the
Railway Station. She was very grateful for his kindness and the trouble he had
taken, and smiled pleasantly and sympathetically as one who knew the Alice-
Chisane reason of that kindness. And Hannasyde abused the coolies with the
luggage, and hustled the people on the platform, and prayed that the roof might
fall in and slay him.

As the train went out slowly, Mrs. Landys-Haggert leaned out of the window to
say goodbye:--"On second thoughts au revoir, Mr. Hannasyde. I go Home in the
Spring, and perhaps I may meet you in Town."

Hannasyde shook hands, and said very earnestly and adoringly:--"I hope to
Heaven I shall never see your face again!"

nd Mrs. Haggert understood.

 WRESSLEY OF THE FOREIGN OFFICE.

 I closed and drew for my love's sake,
  That now is false to me,
 And I slew the Riever of Tarrant Moss,
  And set Dumeny free.

 And ever they give me praise and gold,
  And ever I moan my loss,
 For I struck the blow for my false love's sake,
  And not for the men at the Moss.
               --Tarrant Moss.

One of the many curses of our life out here is the want of atmosphere in the
painter's sense. There are no half-tints worth noticing. Men stand out all
crude and raw, with nothing to tone them down, and nothing to scale them
against. They do their work, and grow to think that there is nothing but their
work, and nothing like their work, and that they are the real pivots on which
the administration turns. Here is an instance of this feeling. A half-caste
clerk was ruling forms in a Pay Office. He said to me:--"Do you know what would
happen if I added or took away one single line on this sheet?" Then, with the
air of a conspirator:--"It would disorganize the whole of the Treasury payments
throughout the whole of the Presidency Circle! Think of that?"

If men had not this delusion as to the ultra-importance of their own particular
employments, I suppose that they would sit down and kill themselves. But their
weakness is wearisome, particularly when the listener knows that he himself
commits exactly the same sin.

Even the Secretariat believes that it does good when it asks an over-driven
Executive Officer to take census of wheat-weevils through a district of five
thousand square miles.

There was a man once in the Foreign Office--a man who had grown middle-aged in
the department, and was commonly said, by irreverent juniors, to be able to
repeat Aitchison's "Treaties and Sunnuds" backwards, in his sleep. What he did
with his stored knowledge only the Secretary knew; and he, naturally, would not
publish the news abroad. This man's name was Wressley, and it was the
Shibboleth, in those days, to say:--"Wressley knows more about the Central
Indian States than any living man." If you did not say this, you were
considered one of mean understanding.

Now-a-days, the man who says that he knows the ravel of the inter-tribal
complications across the Border is of more use; but in Wressley's time, much
attention was paid to the Central Indian States. They were called "foci" and
"factors," and all manner of imposing names.

And here the curse of Anglo-Indian life fell heavily. When Wressley lifted up
his voice, and spoke about such-and-such a succession to such-and-such a
throne, the Foreign Office were silent, and Heads of Departments repeated the
last two or three words of Wressley's sentences, and tacked "yes, yes," on
them, and knew that they were "assisting the Empire to grapple with
seriouspolitical contingencies." In most big undertakings, one or two men do
the work while the rest sit near and talk till the ripe decorations begin to
fall.

Wressley was the working-member of the Foreign Office firm, and, to keep him up
to his duties when he showed signs of flagging, he was made much of by his
superiors and told what a fine fellow he was.

He did not require coaxing, because he was of tough build, but what he received
confirmed him in the belief that there was no one quite so absolutely and
imperatively necessary to the stability of India as Wressley of the Foreign
Office. There might be other good men, but the known, honored and trusted man
among men was Wressley of the Foreign Office. We had a Viceroy in those days
who knew exactly when to "gentle" a fractious big man and to hearten up a
collar-galled little one, and so keep all his team level. He conveyed to
Wressley the impression which I have just set down; and even tough men are apt
to be disorganized by a Viceroy's praise. There was a case once--but that is
another story.

All India knew Wressley's name and office--it was in Thacker and Spink's
Directory--but who he was personally, or what he did, or what his special
merits were, not fifty men knew or cared. His work filled all his time, and he
found no leisure to cultivate acquaintances beyond those of dead Rajput chiefs
with Ahir blots in their 'scutcheons. Wressley would have made a very good
Clerk in the Herald's College had he not been a Bengal Civilian.

Upon a day, between office and office, great trouble came to Wressley--
overwhelmed him, knocked him down, and left him gasping as though he had been a
little school-boy. Without reason, against prudence, and at a moment's notice,
he fell in love with a frivolous, golden-haired girl who used to tear about
Simla Mall on a high, rough waler, with a blue velvet jockey-cap crammed over
her eyes. Her name was Venner--Tillie Venner--and she was delightful.

She took Wressley's heart at a hand-gallop, and Wressley found that it was not
good for man to live alone; even with half the Foreign Office Records in his
presses.

Then Simla laughed, for Wressley in love was slightly ridiculous.

He did his best to interest the girl in himself--that is to say, his work--and
she, after the manner of women, did her best to appear interested in what,
behind his back, she called "Mr. Wressley's Wajahs"; for she lisped very
prettily. She did not understand one little thing about them, but she acted as
if she did. Men have married on that sort of error before now.

Providence, however, had care of Wressley. He was immensely struck with Miss
Venner's intelligence. He would have been more impressed had he heard her
private and confidential accounts of his calls. He held peculiar notions as to
the wooing of girls. He said that the best work of a man's career should be
laid reverently at their feet.

Ruskin writes something like this somewhere, I think; but in ordinary life a
few kisses are better and save time.

About a month after he had lost his heart to Miss Venner, and had been doing
his work vilely in consequence, the first idea of his "Native Rule in Central
India" struck Wressley and filled him with joy. It was, as he sketched it, a
great thing--the work of his life--a really comprehensive survey of a most
fascinating subject--to be written with all the special and laboriously
acquired knowledge of Wressley of the Foreign Office--a gift fit for an
Empress.

He told Miss Venner that he was going to take leave, and hoped, on his return,
to bring her a present worthy of her acceptance. Would she wait? Certainly she
would. Wressley drew seventeen hundred rupees a month. She would wait a year
for that. Her mamma would help her to wait.

So Wressley took one year's leave and all the available documents, about a
truck-load, that he could lay hands on, and went down to Central India with his
notion hot in his head. He began his book in the land he was writing of. Too
much official correspondence had made him a frigid workman, and he must have
guessed that he needed the white light of local color on his palette. This is a
dangerous paint for amateurs to play with.

Heavens, how that man worked! He caught his Rajahs, analyzed his Rajahs, and
traced them up into the mists of Time and beyond, with their queens and their
concubines. He dated and cross-dated, pedigreed and triple-pedigreed, compared,
noted, connoted, wove, strung, sorted, selected, inferred, calendared and
counter-calendared for ten hours a day. And, because this sudden and new light
of Love was upon him, he turned those dry bones of history and dirty records of
misdeeds into things to weep or to laugh over as he pleased. His heart and soul
were at the end of his pen, and they got into the ink. He was dowered with
sympathy, insight, humor and style for two hundred and thirty days and nights;
and his book was a Book. He had his vast special knowledge with him, so to
speak; but the spirit, the woven-in human Touch, the poetry and the power of
the output, were beyond all special knowledge. But I doubt whether he knew the
gift that was in him then, and thus he may have lost some happiness. He was
toiling for Tillie Venner, not for himself.

Men often do their best work blind, for some one else's sake.

Also, though this has nothing to do with the story, in India where every one
knows every one else, you can watch men being driven, by the women who govern
them, out of the rank-and-file and sent to take up points alone. A good man
once started, goes forward; but an average man, so soon as the woman loses
interest in his success as a tribute to her power, comes back to the battalion
and is no more heard of.

Wressley bore the first copy of his book to Simla and, blushing and stammering,
presented it to Miss Venner. She read a little of it.

I give her review verbatim:--"Oh, your book? It's all about those how-wid
Wajahs. I didn't understand it."
   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .   .

Wressley of the Foreign Office was broken, smashed,--I am not exaggerating--by
this one frivolous little girl. All that he could say feebly was:--"But, but
it's my magnum opus! The work of my life." Miss Venner did not know what magnum
opus meant; but she knew that Captain Kerrington had won three races at the
last Gymkhana. Wressley didn't press her to wait for him any longer. He had
sense enough for that.

Then came the reaction after the year's strain, and Wressley went back to the
Foreign Office and his "Wajahs," a compiling, gazetteering, report-writing
hack, who would have been dear at three hundred rupees a month. He abided by
Miss Venner's review. Which proves that the inspiration in the book was purely
temporary and unconnected with himself. Nevertheless, he had no right to sink,
in a hill-tarn, five packing-cases, brought up at enormous expense from Bombay,
of the best book of Indian history ever written.

When he sold off before retiring, some years later, I was turning over his
shelves, and came across the only existing copy of "Native Rule in Central
India"--the copy that Miss Venner could not understand. I read it, sitting on
his mule-trucks, as long as the light lasted, and offered him his own price for
it. He looked over my shoulder for a few pages and said to himself drearily:--
"Now, how in the world did I come to write such damned good stuff as that?"
Then to me:--"Take it and keep it. Write one of your penny-farthing yarns about
its birth. Perhaps--perhaps--the whole business may have been ordained to that
end."

Which, knowing what Wressley of the Foreign Office was once, struck me as about
the bitterest thing that I had ever heard a man say of his own work.



 BY WORD OF MOUTH.

 Not though you die tonight, O Sweet, and wail,
  A spectre at my door,
 Shall mortal Fear make Love immortal fail--
  I shall but love you more,
 Who from Death's house returning, give me still
  One moment's comfort in my matchless ill.
                    --Shadow Houses.

This tale may be explained by those who know how souls are made, and where the
bounds of the Possible are put down. I have lived long enough in this country
to know that it is best to know nothing, and can only write the story as it
happened.

Dumoise was our Civil Surgeon at Meridki, and we called him "Dormouse," because
he was a round little, sleepy little man. He was a good Doctor and never
quarrelled with any one, not even with our Deputy Commissioner, who had the
manners of a bargee and the tact of a horse. He married a girl as round and as
sleepy-looking as himself. She was a Miss Hillardyce, daughter of "Squash"
Hillardyce of the Berars, who married his Chief's daughter by mistake. But that
is another story.

A honeymoon in India is seldom more than a week long; but there is nothing to
hinder a couple from extending it over two or three years. This is a delightful
country for married folk who are wrapped up in one another. They can live
absolutely alone and without interruption--just as the Dormice did. These two
little people retired from the world after their marriage, and were very happy.
They were forced, of course, to give occasional dinners, but they made no
friends hereby, and the Station went its own way and forgot them; only saying,
occasionally, that Dormouse was the best of good fellows, though dull. A Civil
Surgeon who never quarrels is a rarity, appreciated as such.

Few people can afford to play Robinson Crusoe anywhere--least of all in India,
where we are few in the land, and very much dependent on each other's kind
offices. Dumoise was wrong in shutting himself from the world for a year, and
he discovered his mistake when an epidemic of typhoid broke out in the Station
in the heart of the cold weather, and his wife went down. He was a shy little
man, and five days were wasted before he realized that Mrs. Dumoise was burning
with something worse than simple fever, and three days more passed before he
ventured to call on Mrs. Shute, the Engineer's wife, and timidly speak about
his trouble. Nearly every household in India knows that Doctors are very
helpless in typhoid. The battle must be fought out between Death and the
Nurses, minute by minute and degree by degree. Mrs. Shute almost boxed
Dumoise's ears for what she called his "criminal delay," and went off at once
to look after the poor girl. We had seven cases of typhoid in the Station that
winter and, as the average of death is about one in every five cases, we felt
certain that we should have to lose somebody. But all did their best. The women
sat up nursing the women, and the men turned to and tended the bachelors who
were down, and we wrestled with those typhoid cases for fifty-six days, and
brought them through the Valley of the Shadow in triumph. But, just when we
thought all was over, and were going to give a dance to celebrate the victory,
little Mrs. Dumoise got a relapse and died in a week and the Station went to
the funeral. Dumoise broke down utterly at the brink of the grave, and had to
be taken away.

After the death, Dumoise crept into his own house and refused to be comforted.
He did his duties perfectly, but we all felt that he should go on leave, and
the other men of his own Service told him so. Dumoise was very thankful for the
suggestion--he was thankful for anything in those days--and went to Chini on a
walking-tour.

Chini is some twenty marches from Simla, in the heart of the Hills, and the
scenery is good if you are in trouble. You pass through big, still deodar-
forests, and under big, still cliffs, and over big, still grass-downs swelling
like a woman's breasts; and the wind across the grass, and the rain among the
deodars says:--"Hush--hush--hush." So little Dumoise was packed off to Chini,
to wear down his grief with a full-plate camera, and a rifle. He took also a
useless bearer, because the man had been his wife's favorite servant. He was
idle and a thief, but Dumoise trusted everything to him.

On his way back from Chini, Dumoise turned aside to Bagi, through the Forest
Reserve which is on the spur of Mount Huttoo. Some men who have travelled more
than a little say that the march from Kotegarh to Bagi is one of the finest in
creation. It runs through dark wet forest, and ends suddenly in bleak, nipped
hill-side and black rocks. Bagi dak-bungalow is open to all the winds and is
bitterly cold. Few people go to Bagi. Perhaps that was the reason why Dumoise
went there. He halted at seven in the evening, and his bearer went down the
hill-side to the village to engage coolies for the next day's march. The sun
had set, and the night-winds were beginning to croon among the rocks. Dumoise
leaned on the railing of the verandah, waiting for his bearer to return. The
man came back almost immediately after he had disappeared, and at such a rate
that Dumoise fancied he must have crossed a bear. He was running as hard as he
could up the face of the hill.

But there was no bear to account for his terror. He raced to the verandah and
fell down, the blood spurting from his nose and his face iron-gray. Then he
gurgled:--"I have seen the Memsahib! I have seen the Memsahib!"

"Where?" said Dumoise.

"Down there, walking on the road to the village. She was in a blue dress, and
she lifted the veil of her bonnet and said:--'Ram Dass, give my salaams to the
Sahib, and tell him that I shall meet him next month at Nuddea.' Then I ran
away, because I was afraid."

What Dumoise said or did I do not know. Ram Dass declares that he said nothing,
but walked up and down the verandah all the cold night, waiting for the
Memsahib to come up the hill and stretching out his arms into the dark like a
madman. But no Memsahib came, and, next day, he went on to Simla cross-
questioning the bearer every hour.

Ram Dass could only say that he had met Mrs. Dumoise and that she had lifted up
her veil and given him the message which he had faithfully repeated to Dumoise.
To this statement Ram Dass adhered.

He did not know where Nuddea was, had no friends at Nuddea, and would most
certainly never go to Nuddea; even though his pay were doubled.

Nuddea is in Bengal, and has nothing whatever to do with a doctor serving in
the Punjab. It must be more than twelve hundred miles from Meridki.

Dumoise went through Simla without halting, and returned to Meridki there to
take over charge from the man who had been officiating for him during his tour.
There were some Dispensary accounts to be explained, and some recent orders of
the Surgeon-General to be noted, and, altogether, the taking-over was a full
day's work. In the evening, Dumoise told his locum tenens, who was an old
friend of his bachelor days, what had happened at Bagi; and the man said that
Ram Dass might as well have chosen Tuticorin while he was about it.

At that moment a telegraph-peon came in with a telegram from Simla, ordering
Dumoise not to take over charge at Meridki, but to go at once to Nuddea on
special duty. There was a nasty outbreak of cholera at Nuddea, and the Bengal
Government, being shorthanded, as usual, had borrowed a Surgeon from the
Punjab.

Dumoise threw the telegram across the table and said:--"Well?"

The other Doctor said nothing. It was all that he could say.

Then he remembered that Dumoise had passed through Simla on his way from Bagi;
and thus might, possibly, have heard the first news of the impending transfer.

He tried to put the question, and the implied suspicion into words, but Dumoise
stopped him with:--"If I had desired THAT, I should never have come back from
Chini. I was shooting there. I wish to live, for I have things to do . . . .
but I shall not be sorry."

The other man bowed his head, and helped, in the twilight, to pack up Dumoise's
just opened trunks. Ram Dass entered with the lamps.

"Where is the Sahib going?" he asked.

"To Nuddea," said Dumoise, softly.

Ram Dass clawed Dumoise's knees and boots and begged him not to go.

Ram Dass wept and howled till he was turned out of the room. Then he wrapped up
all his belongings and came back to ask for a character. He was not going to
Nuddea to see his Sahib die, and, perhaps to die himself.

So Dumoise gave the man his wages and went down to Nuddea alone; the other
Doctor bidding him goodbye as one under sentence of death.

Eleven days later, he had joined his Memsahib; and the Bengal Government had to
borrow a fresh Doctor to cope with that epidemic at Nuddea. The first
importation lay dead in Chooadanga Dak-Bungalow.



 TO BE HELD FOR REFERENCE.

 By the hoof of the Wild Goat up-tossed
 From the Cliff where She lay in the Sun,
     Fell the Stone To the Tarn where the daylight is lost;
 So She fell from the light of the Sun,
     And alone.

 Now the fall was ordained from the first,
 With the Goat and the Cliff and the Tarn,
     But the Stone Knows only Her life is accursed,
 As She sinks in the depths of the Tarn,
     And alone.

 Oh, Thou who has builded the world,
 Oh, Thou who hast lighted the Sun!
 Oh, Thou who hast darkened the Tarn!
    Judge Thou The Sin of the Stone that was hurled
 By the Goat from the light of the Sun,
 As She sinks in the mire of the Tarn,
    Even now--even now--even now!
      --From the Unpublished Papers of McIntosh Jellaludin.

   "Say, is it dawn, is it dusk in thy Bower,
    Thou whom I long for, who longest for me?
    Oh be it night--be it--"

Here he fell over a little camel-colt that was sleeping in the Serai where the
horse-traders and the best of the blackguards from Central Asia live; and,
because he was very drunk indeed and the night was dark, he could not rise
again till I helped him. That was the beginning of my acquaintance with
McIntosh Jellaludin. When a loafer, and drunk, sings The Song of the Bower, he
must be worth cultivating. He got off the camel's back and said, rather
thickly:--"I--I--I'm a bit screwed, but a dip in Loggerhead will put me right
again; and I say, have you spoken to Symonds about the mare's knees?"

Now Loggerhead was six thousand weary miles away from us, close to Mesopotamia,
where you mustn't fish and poaching is impossible, and Charley Symonds' stable
a half mile further across the paddocks. It was strange to hear all the old
names, on a May night, among the horses and camels of the Sultan Caravanserai.
Then the man seemed to remember himself and sober down at the same time. He
leaned against the camel and pointed to a corner of the Serai where a lamp was
burning:--

"I live there," said he, "and I should be extremely obliged if you would be
good enough to help my mutinous feet thither; for I am more than usually drunk-
-most--most phenomenally tight. But not in respect to my head. 'My brain cries
out against'--how does it go? But my head rides on the--rolls on the dung-hill
I should have said, and controls the qualm."

I helped him through the gangs of tethered horses and he collapsed on the edge
of the verandah in front of the line of native quarters.

"Thanks--a thousand thanks! O Moon and little, little Stars! To think that a
man should so shamelessly . . . . Infamous liquor, too. Ovid in exile drank no
worse. Better. It was frozen. Alas! I had no ice. Good night. I would introduce
you to my wife were I sober--or she civilized."

A native woman came out of the darkness of the room, and began calling the man
names; so I went away. He was the most interesting loafer that I had the
pleasure of knowing for a long time; and later on, he became a friend of mine.
He was a tall, well-built, fair man fearfully shaken with drink, and he looked
nearer fifty than the thirty-five which, he said, was his real age. When a man
begins to sink in India, and is not sent Home by his friends as soon as may be,
he falls very low from a respectable point of view. By the time that he changes
his creed, as did McIntosh, he is past redemption.

In most big cities, natives will tell you of two or three Sahibs, generally
low-caste, who have turned Hindu or Mussulman, and who live more or less as
such. But it is not often that you can get to know them. As McIntosh himself
used to say:--"If I change my religion for my stomach's sake, I do not seek to
become a martyr to missionaries, nor am I anxious for notoriety."

At the outset of acquaintance McIntosh warned me. "Remember this. I am not an
object for charity. I require neither your money, your food, nor your cast-off
raiment. I am that rare animal, a self-supporting drunkard. If you choose, I
will smoke with you, for the tobacco of the bazars does not, I admit, suit my
palate; and I will borrow any books which you may not specially value. It is
more than likely that I shall sell them for bottles of excessively filthy
country-liquors. In return, you shall share such hospitality as my house
affords. Here is a charpoy on which two can sit, and it is possible that there
may, from time to time, be food in that platter. Drink, unfortunately, you will
find on the premises at any hour: and thus I make you welcome to all my poor
establishments."

I was admitted to the McIntosh household--I and my good tobacco.

But nothing else. Unluckily, one cannot visit a loafer in the Serai by day.
Friends buying horses would not understand it.

Consequently, I was obliged to see McIntosh after dark. He laughed at this, and
said simply:--"You are perfectly right. When I enjoyed a position in society,
rather higher than yours, I should have done exactly the same thing, Good
Heavens! I was once"--he spoke as though he had fallen from the Command of a
Regiment--"an Oxford Man!" This accounted for the reference to Charley Symonds'
stable.

"You," said McIntosh, slowly, "have not had that advantage; but, to outward
appearance, you do not seem possessed of a craving for strong drinks. On the
whole, I fancy that you are the luckier of the two. Yet I am not certain. You
are--forgive my saying so even while I am smoking your excellent tobacco--
painfully ignorant of many things."

We were sitting together on the edge of his bedstead, for he owned no chairs,
watching the horses being watered for the night, while the native woman was
preparing dinner. I did not like being patronized by a loafer, but I was his
guest for the time being, though he owned only one very torn alpaca-coat and a
pair of trousers made out of gunny-bags. He took the pipe out of his mouth, and
went on judicially:--"All things considered, I doubt whether you are the
luckier. I do not refer to your extremely limited classical attainments, or
your excruciating quantities, but to your gross ignorance of matters more
immediately under your notice. That for instance."--He pointed to a woman
cleaning a samovar near the well in the centre of the Serai. She was flicking
the water out of the spout in regular cadenced jerks.

"There are ways and ways of cleaning samovars. If you knew why she was doing
her work in that particular fashion, you would know what the Spanish Monk meant
when he said--

   'I the Trinity illustrate,
     Drinking watered orange-pulp--
   In three sips the Aryan frustrate,
     While he drains his at one gulp.--'

and many other things which now are hidden from your eyes. However, Mrs.
McIntosh has prepared dinner. Let us come and eat after the fashion of the
people of the country--of whom, by the way, you know nothing."

The native woman dipped her hand in the dish with us. This was wrong. The wife
should always wait until the husband has eaten.

McIntosh Jellaludin apologized, saying:--

"It is an English prejudice which I have not been able to overcome; and she
loves me. Why, I have never been able to understand. I fore-gathered with her
at Jullundur, three years ago, and she has remained with me ever since. I
believe her to be moral, and know her to be skilled in cookery."

He patted the woman's head as he spoke, and she cooed softly. She was not
pretty to look at.

McIntosh never told me what position he had held before his fall.

He was, when sober, a scholar and a gentleman. When drunk, he was rather more
of the first than the second. He used to get drunk about once a week for two
days. On those occasions the native woman tended him while he raved in all
tongues except his own. One day, indeed, he began reciting Atalanta in Calydon,
and went through it to the end, beating time to the swing of the verse with a
bedstead-leg. But he did most of his ravings in Greek or German. The man's mind
was a perfect rag-bag of useless things. Once, when he was beginning to get
sober, he told me that I was the only rational being in the Inferno into which
he had descended--a Virgil in the Shades, he said--and that, in return for my
tobacco, he would, before he died, give me the materials of a new Inferno that
should make me greater than Dante. Then he fell asleep on a horse-blanket and
woke up quite calm.

"Man," said he, "when you have reached the uttermost depths of degradation,
little incidents which would vex a higher life, are to you of no consequence.
Last night, my soul was among the gods; but I make no doubt that my bestial
body was writhing down here in the garbage."

"You were abominably drunk if that's what you mean," I said.

"I WAS drunk--filthy drunk. I who am the son of a man with whom you have no
concern--I who was once Fellow of a College whose buttery- hatch you have not
seen. I was loathsomely drunk. But consider how lightly I am touched. It is
nothing to me. Less than nothing; for I do not even feel the headache which
should be my portion. Now, in a higher life, how ghastly would have been my
punishment, how bitter my repentance! Believe me, my friend with the neglected
education, the highest is as the lowest--always supposing each degree extreme."

He turned round on the blanket, put his head between his fists and continued:--

"On the Soul which I have lost and on the Conscience which I have killed, I
tell you that I CANNOT feel! I am as the gods, knowing good and evil, but
untouched by either. Is this enviable or is it not?"

When a man has lost the warning of "next morning's head," he must be in a bad
state, I answered, looking at McIntosh on the blanket, with his hair over his
eyes and his lips blue-white, that I did not think the insensibility good
enough.

"For pity's sake, don't say that! I tell you, it IS good and most enviable.
Think of my consolations!"

"Have you so many, then, McIntosh?"

"Certainly; your attempts at sarcasm which is essentially the weapon of a
cultured man, are crude. First, my attainments, my classical and literary
knowledge, blurred, perhaps, by immoderate drinking--which reminds me that
before my soul went to the Gods last night, I sold the Pickering Horace you so
kindly lent me. Ditta Mull the Clothesman has it. It fetched ten annas, and may
be redeemed for a rupee--but still infinitely superior to yours. Secondly, the
abiding affection of Mrs. McIntosh, best of wives. Thirdly, a monument, more
enduring than brass, which I have built up in the seven years of my
degradation."

He stopped here, and crawled across the room for a drink of water.

He was very shaky and sick.

He referred several times to his "treasure"--some great possession that he
owned--but I held this to be the raving of drink. He was as poor and as proud
as he could be. His manner was not pleasant, but he knew enough about the
natives, among whom seven years of his life had been spent, to make his
acquaintance worth having. He used actually to laugh at Strickland as an
ignorant man--"ignorant West and East"--he said. His boast was, first, that he
was an Oxford Man of rare and shining parts, which may or may not have been
true--I did not know enough to check his statements--and, secondly, that he
"had his hand on the pulse of native life"--which was a fact. As an Oxford man,
he struck me as a prig: he was always throwing his education about. As a
Mahommedan faquir--as McIntosh Jellaludin--he was all that I wanted for my own
ends. He smoked several pounds of my tobacco, and taught me several ounces of
things worth knowing; but he would never accept any gifts, not even when the
cold weather came, and gripped the poor thin chest under the poor thin alpaca-
coat. He grew very angry, and said that I had insulted him, and that he was not
going into hospital. He had lived like a beast and he would die rationally,
like a man.

As a matter of fact, he died of pneumonia; and on the night of his death sent
over a grubby note asking me to come and help him to die.

The native woman was weeping by the side of the bed. McIntosh, wrapped in a
cotton cloth, was too weak to resent a fur coat being thrown over him. He was
very active as far as his mind was concerned, and his eyes were blazing. When
he had abused the Doctor who came with me so foully that the indignant old
fellow left, he cursed me for a few minutes and calmed down.

Then he told his wife to fetch out "The Book" from a hole in the wall. She
brought out a big bundle, wrapped in the tail of a petticoat, of old sheets of
miscellaneous note-paper, all numbered and covered with fine cramped writing.
McIntosh ploughed his hand through the rubbish and stirred it up lovingly.

"This," he said, "is my work--the Book of McIntosh Jellaludin, showing what he
saw and how he lived, and what befell him and others; being also an account of
the life and sins and death of Mother Maturin. What Mirza Murad Ali Beg's book
is to all other books on native life, will my work be to Mirza Murad Ali
Beg's!"

This, as will be conceded by any one who knows Mirza Ali Beg's book, was a
sweeping statement. The papers did not look specially valuable; but McIntosh
handled them as if they were currency-notes.

Then he said slowly:--"In despite the many weaknesses of your education, you
have been good to me. I will speak of your tobacco when I reach the Gods. I owe
you much thanks for many kindnesses.

"But I abominate indebtedness. For this reason I bequeath to you now the
monument more enduring than brass--my one book--rude and imperfect in parts,
but oh, how rare in others! I wonder if you will understand it. It is a gift
more honorable than . . . Bah! where is my brain rambling to? You will mutilate
it horribly. You will knock out the gems you call 'Latin quotations,' you
Philistine, and you will butcher the style to carve into your own jerky jargon;
but you cannot destroy the whole of it. I bequeath it to you.

Ethel . . . My brain again! . . Mrs. McIntosh, bear witness that I give the
sahib all these papers. They would be of no use to you, Heart of my heart; and
I lay it upon you," he turned to me here, "that you do not let my book die in
its present form. It is yours unconditionally--the story of McIntosh
Jellaludin, which is NOT the story of McIntosh Jellaludin, but of a greater man
than he, and of a far greater woman. Listen now! I am neither mad nor drunk!
That book will make you famous."

I said, "thank you," as the native woman put the bundle into my arms.

"My only baby!" said McIntosh with a smile. He was sinking fast, but he
continued to talk as long as breath remained. I waited for the end: knowing
that, in six cases out of ten the dying man calls for his mother. He turned on
his side and said:--

"Say how it came into your possession. No one will believe you, but my name, at
least, will live. You will treat it brutally, I know you will. Some of it must
go; the public are fools and prudish fools. I was their servant once. But do
your mangling gently--very gently. It is a great work, and I have paid for it
in seven years' damnation."

His voice stopped for ten or twelve breaths, and then he began mumbling a
prayer of some kind in Greek. The native woman cried very bitterly. Lastly, he
rose in bed and said, as loudly as slowly:--"Not guilty, my Lord!"

Then he fell back, and the stupor held him till he died. The native woman ran
into the Serai among the horses and screamed and beat her breasts; for she had
loved him.

Perhaps his last sentence in life told what McIntosh had once gone through;
but, saving the big bundle of old sheets in the cloth, there was nothing in his
room to say who or what he had been.

The papers were in a hopeless muddle.

Strickland helped me to sort them, and he said that the writer was either an
extreme liar or a most wonderful person. He thought the former. One of these
days, you may be able to judge for yourself.

The bundle needed much expurgation and was full of Greek nonsense, at the head
of the chapters, which has all been cut out.

If the things are ever published some one may perhaps remember this story, now
printed as a safeguard to prove that McIntosh Jellaludin and not I myself wrote
the Book of Mother Maturin.

I don't want the Giant's Robe to come true in my case.




 VOLUME VI THE LIGHT THAT FAILED

THE LIGHT THAT FAILED

CHAPTER I

 So we settled it all when the storm was done
  As comf'y as comf'y could be;
  And I was to wait in the barn, my dears,  Because I was only three;
  And Teddy would run to the rainbow's foot,
  Because he was five and a man;
  And that's how it all began, my dears,
  And that's how it all began.
              --Big Barn Stories.

"WHAT do you think she'd do if she caught us? We oughtn't to have it, you
know," said Maisie.

"Beat me, and lock you up in your bedroom," Dick answered, without  hesitation.
"Have you got the cartridges?"

"Yes; they"re in my pocket, but they are joggling horribly. Do pin-fire 
cartridges go off of their own accord?"

"Don't know. Take the revolver, if you are afraid, and let me carry them."

"I'm not afraid." Maisie strode forward swiftly, a hand in her pocket  and her
chin in the air. Dick followed with a small pin-fire revolver.

The children had discovered that their lives would be unendurable without
pistol-practice. After much forethought and self-denial, Dick had saved seven
shillings and sixpence, the price of a badly constructed Belgian revolver.
Maisie could only contribute half a crown to the syndicate for the purchase of
a hundred cartridges. "You can save better than I can, Dick," she explained; "I
like nice things to eat, and it doesn't matter to you. Besides, boys ought to
do these things."

Dick grumbled a little at the arrangement, but went out and made the purchase,
which the children were then on their way to test. Revolvers did not lie in the
scheme of their daily life as decreed for them by the guardian who was
incorrectly supposed to stand in the place of a mother to these two orphans.
Dick had been under her care for six years, during which time she had made her
profit of the allowances supposed to be expended on his clothes, and, partly
through thoughtlessness, partly through a natural desire to pain,--she was a
widow of some years anxious to marry again,--had made his days burdensome on
his young shoulders.

Where he had looked for love, she gave him first aversion and then hate.

Where he growing older had sought a little sympathy, she gave him ridicule. The
many hours that she could spare from the ordering of her small house she
devoted to what she called the home-training of Dick Heldar. Her religion,
manufactured in the main by her own intelligence and a keen study of the
Scriptures, was an aid to her in this matter. At such times as she herself was
not personally displeased with Dick, she left him to understand that he had a
heavy account to settle with his Creator; wherefore Dick learned to loathe his
God as intensely as he loathed Mrs. Jennett; and this is not a wholesome frame
of mind for the young. Since she chose to regard him as a hopeless liar, when
dread of pain drove him to his first untruth he naturally developed into a
liar, but an economical and self-contained one, never throwing away the least
unnecessary fib, and never hesitating at the blackest, were it only plausible,
that might make his life a little easier. The treatment taught him at least the
power of living alone,--a power that was of service to him when he went to a
public school and the boys laughed at his clothes, which were poor in quality
and much mended. In the holidays he returned to the teachings of Mrs. Jennett,
and, that the chain of discipline might not be weakened by association with the
world, was generally beaten, on one account or another, before he had been
twelve hours under her roof.

The autumn of one year brought him a companion in bondage, a long-haired, gray-
eyed little atom, as self-contained as himself, who moved about the house
silently and for the first few weeks spoke only to the goat that was her
chiefest friend on earth and lived in the back-garden. Mrs. Jennett objected to
the goat on the grounds that he was un-Christian,--which he certainly was.
"Then," said the atom, choosing her words very deliberately, "I shall write to
my lawyer-peoples and tell them that you are a very bad woman. Amomma is mine,
mine, mine!" Mrs. Jennett made a movement to the hall, where certain umbrellas
and canes stood in a rack. The atom understood as clearly as Dick what this
meant. "I have been beaten before," she said, still in the same passionless
voice; "I have been beaten worse than you can ever beat me. If you beat me I
shall write to my lawyer-peoples and tell them that you do not give me enough
to eat. I am not afraid of you." Mrs. Jennett did not go into the hall, and the
atom, after a pause to assure herself that all danger of war was past, went
out, to weep bitterly on Amomma"s neck.

Dick learned to know her as Maisie, and at first mistrusted her profoundly, for
he feared that she might interfere with the small liberty of action left to
him. She did not, however; and she volunteered no friendliness until Dick had
taken the first steps. Long before the holidays were over, the stress of
punishment shared in common drove the children together, if it were only to
play into each other's hands as they prepared lies for Mrs. Jennett"s use. When
Dick returned to school, Maisie whispered, "Now I shall be all alone to take
care of myself; but," and she nodded her head bravely, "I can do it. You
promised to send Amomma a grass collar. Send it soon." A week later she asked
for that collar by return of post, and was not pleased when she learned that it
took time to make. When at last Dick forwarded the gift, she forgot to thank
him for it.

Many holidays had come and gone since that day, and Dick had grown into a lanky
hobbledehoy more than ever conscious of his bad clothes. Not for a moment had
Mrs. Jennett relaxed her tender care of him, but the average canings of a
public school--Dick fell under punishment about three times a month--filled him
with contempt for her powers. "She doesn't hurt," he explained to Maisie, who
urged him to rebellion, "and she is kinder to you after she has whacked me."
Dick shambled through the days unkempt in body and savage in soul, as the
smaller boys of the school learned to know, for when the spirit moved him he
would hit them, cunningly and with science. The same spirit made him more than
once try to tease Maisie, but the girl refused to be made unhappy. "We are both
miserable as it is," said she. "What is the use of trying to make things worse?
Let's find things to do, and forget things."

The pistol was the outcome of that search. It could only be used on the
muddiest foreshore of the beach, far away from the bathing-machines and
pierheads, below the grassy slopes of Fort Keeling. The tide ran out nearly two
miles on that coast, and the many-coloured mud-banks, touched by the sun, sent
up a lamentable smell of dead weed. It was late in the afternoon when Dick and
Maisie arrived on their ground, Amomma trotting patiently behind them.

"Mf!" said Maisie, sniffing the air. "I wonder what makes the sea so smelly? I
don'tlike it!"

"You never like anything that isn't made just for you," said Dick bluntly.
"Give me the cartridges, and I'll try first shot. How far does one of these
little revolvers carry?"

"Oh, half a mile," said Maisie, promptly. "At least it makes an awful noise. Be
careful with the cartridges; I don't like those jagged stick-up things on the
rim. Dick, do be careful."

"All right. I know how to load. I'll fire at the breakwater out there."

He fired, and Amomma ran away bleating. The bullet threw up a spurt of mud to
the right of the wood-wreathed piles.

"Throws high and to the right. You try, Maisie. Mind, it's loaded all round."

Maisie took the pistol and stepped delicately to the verge of the mud, her hand
firmly closed on the butt, her mouth and left eye screwed up.

Dick sat down on a tuft of bank and laughed. Amomma returned very cautiously.
He was accustomed to strange experiences in his afternoon walks, and, finding
the cartridge-box unguarded, made investigations with his nose. Maisie fired,
but could not see where the bullet went.

"I think it hit the post," she said, shading her eyes and looking out across
the sailless sea.

"I know it has gone out to the Marazion Bell-buoy," said Dick, with a chuckle.
"Fire low and to the left; then perhaps you"ll get it. Oh, look at Amomma!--
he"s eating the cartridges!"

Maisie turned, the revolver in her hand, just in time to see Amomma scampering
away from the pebbles Dick threw after him. Nothing is sacred to a billy-goat.
Being well fed and the adored of his mistress, Amomma had naturally swallowed
two loaded pin-fire cartridges. Maisie hurried up to assure herself that Dick
had not miscounted the tale.

"Yes, he's eaten two."

"Horrid little beast! Then they'll joggle about inside him and blow up, and
serve him right. . . . Oh, Dick! have I killed you?"

 Revolvers are tricky things for young hands to deal with. Maisie could not
explain how it had happened, but a veil of reeking smoke separated her from
Dick, and she was quite certain that the pistol had gone off in his face. Then
she heard him sputter, and dropped on her knees beside him, crying, "Dick, you
aren't hurt, are you? I didn't mean it."

 "Of course you didn't, said Dick, coming out of the smoke and wiping his
cheek. "But you nearly blinded me. That powder stuff stings awfully." A neat
little splash of gray led on a stone showed where the bullet had gone. Maisie
began to whimper.

"Don't," said Dick, jumping to his feet and shaking himself. "I'm not a bit
hurt."

"No, but I might have killed you," protested Maisie, the corners of her mouth
drooping. "What should I have done then?"

"Gone home and told Mrs. Jennett." Dick grinned at the thought; then,
softening, "Please don'tworry about it. Besides, we are wasting time. We've got
to get back to tea. I'll take the revolver for a bit."

Maisie would have wept on the least encouragement, but Dick's indifference,
albeit his hand was shaking as he picked up the pistol, restrained her. She lay
panting on the beach while Dick methodically bombarded the breakwater. "Got it
at last!" he exclaimed, as a lock of weed flew from the wood.

"Let me try," said Maisie, imperiously. "I'm all right now."

They fired in turns till the rickety little revolver nearly shook itself to
pieces, and Amomma the outcast--because he might blow up at any moment--browsed
in the background and wondered why stones were thrown at him. Then they found a
balk of timber floating in a pool which was commanded by the seaward slope of
Fort Keeling, and they sat down together before this new target.

"Next holidays," said Dick, as the now thoroughly fouled revolver kicked wildly
in his hand, "we'll get another pistol,--central fire,--that will carry
farther."

"There won'tbe any next holidays for me," said Maisie. "I'm going away."

"Where to?"

"I don't know. My lawyers have written to Mrs. Jennett, and I've got to be
educated somewhere,--in France, perhaps,--I don'tknow where; but I shall be
glad to go away."

 "I shan't like it a bit. I suppose I shall be left. Look here, Maisie, is it
really true you're going? Then these holidays will be the last I shall see
anything of you; and I go back to school next week. I wish----"

The young blood turned his cheeks scarlet. Maisie was picking grass-tufts and
throwing them down the slope at a yellow sea-poppy nodding all by itself to the
illimitable levels of the mud-flats and the milk-white sea beyond.

"I wish," she said, after a pause, "that I could see you again sometime.
You wish that, too?"

"Yes, but it would have been better if--if--you had--shot straight over there--
down by the breakwater."

Maisie looked with large eyes for a moment. And this was the boy who only ten
days before had decorated Amomma"s horns with cut-paper ham-frills and turned
him out, a bearded derision, among the public ways! Then she dropped her eyes:
this was not the boy.

"Don't be stupid," she said reprovingly, and with swift instinct attacked the
side-issue. "How selfish you are! Just think what I should have felt if that
horrid thing had killed you! I'm quite miserable enough already."

"Why? Because you're going away from Mrs. Jennett?"

"No."

"From me, then?"

No answer for a long time. Dick dared not look at her. He felt, though he did
not know, all that the past four years had been to him, and this the more
acutely since he had no knowledge to put his feelings in words.

"I don't know," she said. "I suppose it is."

"Maisie, you must know. I'm not supposing."

"Let's go home," said Maisie, weakly.

But Dick was not minded to retreat.

"I can't say things," he pleaded, "and I'm awfully sorry for teasing you about
Amomma the other day. It's all different now, Maisie, can't you see? And you
might have told me that you were going, instead of leaving me to find out."

"You didn't. I did tell. Oh, Dick, what's the use of worrying?"

"There isn't any; but we've been together years and years, and I didn't know
how much I cared."

"I don't believe you ever did care."

 "No, I didn't; but I do,--I care awfully now, Maisie," he gulped,--"Maisie,
darling, say you care too, please."

"I do, indeed I do; but it won't be any use."

"Why?"

"Because I am going away."

"Yes, but if you promise before you go. Only say--will you?" A second "darling"
came to his lips more easily than the first. There were few endearments in
Dick's home or school life; he had to find them by instinct. Dick caught the
little hand blackened with the escaped gas of the revolver.

"I promise," she said solemnly; "but if I care there is no need for promising."

"And do you care?" For the first time in the past few minutes their eyes met
and spoke for them who had no skill in speech. . . .

"Oh, Dick, don't! Please don't! It was all right when we said good-morning; but
now it's all different!" Amomma looked on from afar.

He had seen his property quarrel frequently, but he had never seen kisses
exchanged before. The yellow sea-poppy was wiser, and nodded its head
approvingly. Considered as a kiss, that was a failure, but since it was the
first, other than those demanded by duty, in all the world that either had ever
given or taken, it opened to them new worlds, and every one of them glorious,
so that they were lifted above the consideration of any worlds at all,
especially those in which tea is necessary, and sat still, holding each other's
hands and saying not a word.

"You can't  forget now," said Dick, at last. There was that on his cheek that
stung more than gunpowder.

"I shouldn't  have forgotten anyhow," said Maisie, and they looked at each
other and saw that each was changed from the companion of an hour ago to a
wonder and a mystery they could not understand. The sun began to set, and a
night-wind thrashed along the bents of the foreshore.

"We shall be awfully late for tea," said Maisie. "Let's go home."

"Let's use the rest of the cartridges first," said Dick; and he helped Maisie
down the slope of the fort to the sea,--a descent that she was quite capable of
covering at full speed. Equally gravely Maisie took the grimy hand. Dick bent
forward clumsily; Maisie drew the hand away, and Dick blushed.

"It's very pretty," he said.

"Pooh!" said Maisie, with a little laugh of gratified vanity. She stood close
to Dick as he loaded the revolver for the last time and fired over the sea with
a vague notion at the back of his head that he was protecting Maisie from all
the evils in the world. A puddle far across the mud caught the last rays of the
sun and turned into a wrathful red disc. The light held Dick's attention for a
moment, and as he raised his revolver there fell upon him a renewed sense of
the miraculous, in that he was standing by Maisie who had promised to care for
him for an indefinite length of time till such date as----A gust of the growing
wind drove the girl"s long black hair across his face as she stood with her
hand on his shoulder calling Amomma "a little beast," and for a moment he was
in the dark,--a darkness that stung. The bullet went singing out to the empty
sea.

"Spoilt my aim," said he, shaking his head. "There aren't  any more cartridges;
we shall have to run home." But they did not run. They walked very slowly, arm
in arm. And it was a matter of indifference to them whether the neglected
Amomma with two pin-fire cartridges in his inside blew up or trotted beside
them; for they had come into a golden heritage and were disposing of it with
all the wisdom of all their years.

"And I shall be----" quoth Dick, valiantly. Then he checked himself: "I don't 
know what I shall be. I don't  seem to be able to pass any exams, but I can
make awful caricatures of the masters. Ho! Ho!"

"Be an artist, then," said Maisie. "You're always laughing at my trying to
draw; and it will do you good."

"I'll never laugh at anything you do," he answered. "I'll be an artist, and
I'll do things."

"Artists always want money, don'tthey?"

"I've got a hundred and twenty pounds a year of my own. My guardians tell me
I'm to have it when I come of age. That will be enough to begin with."

"Ah, I'm rich," said Maisie. "I"ve got three hundred a year all my own when I'm
twenty-one. That's why Mrs. Jennett is kinder to me than she is to you. I wish,
though, that I had somebody that belonged to me,--just a father or a mother."

"You belong to me," said Dick, "for ever and ever."

"Yes, we belong--for ever. It's very nice." She squeezed his arm. The kindly
darkness hid them both, and, emboldened because he could only just see the
profile of Maisie's cheek with the long lashes veiling the gray eyes, Dick at
the front door delivered himself of the words he had been boggling over for the
last two hours.

"And I--love you, Maisie," he said, in a whisper that seemed to him to ring
across the world,--the world that he would tomorrow or the next day set out to
conquer.

There was a scene, not, for the sake of discipline, to be reported, when Mrs.
Jennett would have fallen upon him, first for disgraceful unpunctuality, and
secondly for nearly killing himself with a forbidden weapon.

"I was playing with it, and it went off by itself," said Dick, when the powder-
pocked cheek could no longer be hidden, "but if you think you're going to lick
me you're wrong. You are never going to touch me again. Sit down and give me my
tea. You can't  cheat us out of that, anyhow."

Mrs. Jennett gasped and became livid. Maisie said nothing, but encouraged Dick
with her eyes, and he behaved abominably all that evening. Mrs. Jennett
prophesied an immediate judgment of Providence and a descent into Tophet later,
but Dick walked in Paradise and would not hear. Only when he was going to bed
Mrs. Jennett recovered and asserted herself. He had bidden Maisie good night
with down-dropped eyes and from a distance.

"If you aren't  a gentleman you might try to behave like one," said Mrs.
Jennett, spitefully. "You"ve been quarrelling with Maisie again."

This meant that the usual good-night kiss had been omitted. Maisie, white to
the lips, thrust her cheek forward with a fine air of indifference, and was
duly pecked by Dick, who tramped out of the room red as fire. That night he
dreamed a wild dream. He had won all the world and brought it to Maisie in a
cartridge-box, but she turned it over with her foot, and, instead of saying
"Thank you," cried--"Where is the grass collar you promised for Amomma? Oh, how
selfish you are!"

 CHAPTER II

 Then we brought the lances down, then the bugles blew,
 When we went to Kandahar, ridin' two an" two,
   Ridin', ridin', ridin', two an" two,
 Ta-ra-ra-ra-ra-ra-ra,
 All the way to Kandahar, ridin' two an" two.
          --Barrack-Room Ballad.

"I'M NOT angry with the British public, but I wish we had a few thousand of
them scattered among these rooks. They wouldn't  be in such a hurry to get at
their morning papers then. Can't  you imagine the regulation householder--Lover
of Justice, Constant Reader, Paterfamilias, and all that lot--frizzling on hot
gravel?"

"With a blue veil over his head, and his clothes in strips. Has any man here a
needle? I've got a piece of sugar-sack."

"I'll lend you a packing-needle for six square inches of it then. Both my knees
are worn through."

"Why not six square acres, while you're about it? But lend me the needle, and
I'll see what I can do with the selvage. I don't  think there's enough to
protect my royal body from the cold blast as it is. What are you doing with
that everlasting sketch-book of yours, Dick?"

"Study of our Special Correspondent repairing his wardrobe," said Dick,
gravely, as the other man kicked off a pair of sorely worn riding-breeches and
began to fit a square of coarse canvas over the most obvious open space. He
grunted disconsolately as the vastness of the void developed itself.

"Sugar-bags, indeed! Hi! you pilot man there! lend me all the sails for that
whale-boat."

A fez-crowned head bobbed up in the stern-sheets, divided itself into exact
halves with one flashing grin, and bobbed down again. The man of the tattered
breeches, clad only in a Norfolk jacket and a gray flannel shirt, went on with
his clumsy sewing, while Dick chuckled over the sketch.

Some twenty whale-boats were nuzzling a sand-bank which was dotted with English
soldiery of half a dozen corps, bathing or washing their clothes. A heap of
boat-rollers, commissariat-boxes, sugar-bags, and flour--and small-arm-
ammunition-cases showed where one of the whale-boats had been compelled to
unload hastily; and a regimental carpenter was swearing aloud as he tried, on a
wholly insufficient allowance of white lead, to plaster up the sun-parched
gaping seams of the boat herself.

"First the bloomin' rudder snaps," said he to the world in general; "then the
mast goes; an' then, s' "help me, when she can't  do nothin' else, she opens
'erself out like a cock-eyed Chinese lotus."

"Exactly the case with my breeches, whoever you are," said the tailor, without
looking up. "Dick, I wonder when I shall see a decent shop again."

There was no answer, save the incessant angry murmur of the Nile as it raced
round a basalt-walled bend and foamed across a rock-ridge half a mile upstream.
It was as though the brown weight of the river would drive the white men back
to their own country. The indescribable scent of Nile mud in the air told that
the stream was falling and the next few miles would be no light thing for the
whale-boats to overpass. The desert ran down almost to the banks, where, among
gray, red, and black hillocks, a camel-corps was encamped. No man dared even
for a day lose touch of the slow-moving boats; there had been no fighting for
weeks past, and throughout all that time the Nile had never spared them. Rapid
had followed rapid, rock rock, and island-group island-group, till the rank and
file had long since lost all count of direction and very nearly of time. They
were moving somewhere, they did not know why, to do something, they did not
know what. Before them lay the Nile, and at the other end of it was one Gordon,
fighting for the dear life, in a town called Khartoum. There were columns of
British troops in the desert, or in one of the many deserts; there were yet
more columns waiting to embark on the river; there were fresh drafts waiting at
Assioot and Assuan; there were lies and rumours running over the face of the
hopeless land from Suakin to the Sixth Cataract, and men supposed generally
that there must be some one in authority to direct the general scheme of the
many movements. The duty of that particular river-column was to keep the whale-
boats afloat in the water, to avoid trampling on the villagers' crops when the
gangs "tracked" the boats with lines thrown from midstream, to get as much
sleep and food as was possible, and, above all, to press on without delay in
the teeth of the churning Nile.

With the soldiers sweated and toiled the correspondents of the newspapers, and
they were almost as ignorant as their companions. But it was above all things
necessary that England at breakfast should be amused and thrilled and
interested, whether Gordon lived or died, or half the British army went to
pieces in the sands. The Soudan campaign was a picturesque one, and lent itself
to vivid word-painting. Now and again a "Special" managed to get slain,--which
was not altogether a disadvantage to the paper that employed him,--and more
often the hand-to-hand nature of the fighting allowed of miraculous escapes
which were worth telegraphing home at eighteenpence the word. There were many
correspondents with many corps and columns,--from the veterans who had followed
on the heels of the cavalry that occupied Cairo in '82, what time Arabi Pasha
called himself king, who had seen the first miserable work round Suakin when
the sentries were cut up nightly and the scrub swarmed with spears, to
youngsters jerked into the business at the end of a telegraph-wire to take the
places of their betters killed or invalided.

Among the seniors--those who knew every shift and change in the perplexing
postal arrangements, the value of the seediest, weediest Egyptian garron
offered for sale in Cairo or Alexandria, who could talk a telegraph-clerk into
amiability and soothe the ruffled vanity of a newly appointed staff-officer
when press regulations became burdensome--was the man in the flannel shirt, the
black-browed Torpenhow. He represented the Central Southern Syndicate in the
campaign, as he had represented it in the Egyptian war, and elsewhere. The
syndicate did not concern itself greatly with criticisms of attack and the
like. It supplied the masses, and all it demanded was picturesqueness and
abundance of detail; for there is more joy in England over a soldier who
insubordinately steps out of square to rescue a comrade than over twenty
generals slaving even to baldness at the gross details of transport and
commissariat.

He had met at Suakin a young man, sitting on the edge of a recently abandoned
redoubt about the size of a hat-box, sketching a clump of shell-torn bodies on
the gravel plain.

"What are you for?" said Torpenhow. The greeting of the correspondent is that
of the commercial traveller on the road.

"My own hand," said the young man, without looking up. "Have you any tobacco?"

Torpenhow waited till the sketch was finished, and when he had looked at it
said, "What's your business here?"

"Nothing; there was a row, so I came. I'm supposed to be doing something down
at the painting-slips among the boats, or else I'm in charge of the condenser
on one of the water-ships. I've forgotten which."

"You've cheek enough to build a redoubt with," said Torpenhow, and took stock
of the new acquaintance. "Do you always draw like that?"

The young man produced more sketches. "Row on a Chinese pig-boat," said he,
sententiously, showing them one after another.--"Chief mate dirked by a
comprador.--Junk ashore off Hakodate.--Somali muleteer being flogged.--Star-
shell bursting over camp at Berbera.--Slave-dhow being chased round Tajurrah
Bah.--Soldier lying dead in the moonlight outside Suakin.--throat cut by
Fuzzies."

"H'm!" said Torpenhow, "can'tsay I care for Verestchagin-and-water myself, but
there's no accounting for tastes. Doing anything now, are you?"

"No. I'm amusing myself here."

Torpenhow looked at the sketches again, and nodded. "Yes, you're right to take
your first chance when you can get it."

He rode away swiftly through the Gate of the Two War-Ships, rattled across the
causeway into the town, and wired to his syndicate, "Got man here, picture-
work. Good and cheap. Shall I arrange? Will do letterpress with sketches."

The man on the redoubt sat swinging his legs and murmuring, "I knew the chance
would come, sooner or later. By Gad, they'll have to sweat for it if I come
through this business alive!"

In the evening Torpenhow was able to announce to his friend that the Central
Southern Agency was willing to take him on trial, paying expenses for three
months. "And, by the way, what's your name?" said Torpenhow.

"Heldar. Do they give me a free hand?"

"They've taken you on chance. You must justify the choice. You"d better stick
to me. I'm going up-country with a column, and I'll do what I can for you. Give
me some of your sketches taken here, and I'll send 'em along." To himself he
said, "That's the best bargain the Central Southern has ever made; and they got
me cheaply enough."

So it came to pass that, after some purchase of horse-flesh and arrangements
financial and political, Dick was made free of the New and Honourable
Fraternity of war correspondents, who all possess the inalienable right of
doing as much work as they can and getting as much for it as Providence and
their owners shall please. To these things are added in time, if the brother be
worthy, the power of glib speech that neither man nor woman can resist when a
meal or a bed is in question, the eye of a horse-cope, the skill of a cook, the
constitution of a bullock, the digestion of an ostrich, and an infinite
adaptability to all circumstances. But many die before they attain to this
degree, and the past-masters in the craft appear for the most part in dress-
clothes when they are in England, and thus their glory is hidden from the
multitude.

Dick followed Torpenhow wherever the latter's fancy chose to lead him, and
between the two they managed to accomplish some work that almost satisfied
themselves. It was not an easy life in any way, and under its influence the two
were drawn very closely together, for they ate from the same dish, they shared
the same water-bottle, and, most binding tie of all, their mails went off
together. It was Dick who managed to make gloriously drunk a telegraph-clerk in
a palm hut far beyond the Second Cataract, and, while the man lay in bliss on
the floor, possessed himself of some laboriously acquired exclusive
information, forwarded by a confiding correspondent of an opposition syndicate,
made a careful duplicate of the matter, and brought the result to Torpenhow,
who said that all was fair in love or war correspondence, and built an
excellent descriptive article from his rival's riotous waste of words. It was
Torpenhow who--but the tale of their adventures, together and apart, from
Philae to the waste wilderness of Herawi and Muella, would fill many books.
They had been penned into a square side by side, in deadly fear of being shot
by over-excited soldiers; they had fought with baggage-camels in the chill
dawn; they had jogged along in silence under blinding sun on indefatigable
little Egyptian horses; and they had floundered on the shallows of the Nile
when the whale-boat in which they had found a berth chose to hit a hidden rock
and rip out half her bottom-planks.

Now they were sitting on the sand-bank, and the whale-boats were bringing up
the remainder of the column.

"Yes," said Torpenhow, as he put the last rude stitches into his over-long-
neglected gear, "it has been a beautiful business."

"The patch or the campaign?" said Dick. "Don't  think much of either, myself."

"You want the Euryalus brought up above the Third Cataract, don't  you? and
eighty-one-ton guns at Jakdul? Now, I'm quite satisfied with my breeches." He
turned round gravely to exhibit himself, after the manner of a clown.

"It's very pretty. Specially the lettering on the sack. G.B.T. Government
Bullock Train. That's a sack from India."

"It's my initials,--Gilbert Belling Torpenhow. I stole the cloth on purpose.
What the mischief are the camel-corps doing yonder?" Torpenhow shaded his eyes
and looked across the scrub-strewn gravel.

A bugle blew furiously, and the men on the bank hurried to their arms and
accoutrements.

"'Pisan soldiery surprised while bathing,'" remarked Dick, calmly.

"D'you remember the picture? It's by Michael Angelo; all beginners copy it.
That scrub's alive with enemy."

The camel-corps on the bank yelled to the infantry to come to them, and a
hoarse shouting down the river showed that the remainder of the column had wind
of the trouble and was hastening to take share in it. As swiftly as a reach of
still water is crisped by the wind, the rock-strewn ridges and scrub-topped
hills were troubled and alive with armed men.

Mercifully, it occurred to these to stand far off for a time, to shout and
gesticulate joyously. One man even delivered himself of a long story. The
camel-corps did not fire. They were only too glad of a little breathing-space,
until some sort of square could be formed. The men on the sand-bank ran to
their side; and the whale-boats, as they toiled up within shouting distance,
were thrust into the nearest bank and emptied of all save the sick and a few
men to guard them. The Arab orator ceased his outcries, and his friends howled.

"They look like the Mahdi's men," said Torpenhow, elbowing himself into the
crush of the square; "but what thousands of 'em there are! The tribes hereabout
aren't  against us, I know."

"Then the Mahdi's taken another town," said Dick, "and set all these yelping
devils free to show us up. Lend us your glass."

"Our scouts should have told us of this. We"ve been trapped," said a subaltern.
"Aren't  the camel guns ever going to begin? Hurry up, you men!"

There was no need of any order. The men flung themselves panting against the
sides of the square, for they had good reason to know that whoso was left
outside when the fighting began would very probably die in an extremely
unpleasant fashion. The little hundred-and-fifty-pound camel-guns posted at one
corner of the square opened the ball as the square moved forward by its right
to get possession of a knoll of rising ground. All had fought in this manner
many times before, and there was no novelty in the entertainment; always the
same hot and stifling formation, the smell of dust and leather, the same
boltlike rush of the enemy, the same pressure on the weakest side, the few
minutes of hand-to-hand scuffle, and then the silence of the desert, broken
only by the yells of those whom their handful of cavalry attempted to purse.
They had become careless. The camel-guns spoke at intervals, and the square
slouched forward amid the protesting of the camels. Then came the attack of
three thousand men who had not learned from books that it is impossible for
troops in close order to attack against breech-loading fire.

A few dropping shots heralded their approach, and a few horsemen led, but the
bulk of the force was naked humanity, mad with rage, and armed with the spear
and the sword. The instinct of the desert, where there is always much war, told
them that the right flank of the square was the weakest, for they swung clear
of the front. The camel-guns shelled them as they passed and opened for an
instant lanes through their midst, most like those quick-closing vistas in a
Kentish hop-garden seen when the train races by at full speed; and the infantry
fire, held till the opportune moment, dropped them in close-packing hundreds.
No civilised troops in the world could have endured the hell through which they
came, the living leaping high to avoid the dying who clutched at their heels,
the wounded cursing and staggering forward, till they fell--a torrent black as
the sliding water above a mill-dam--full on the right flank of the square.

Then the line of the dusty troops and the faint blue desert sky overhead went
out in rolling smoke, and the little stones on the heated ground and the
tinder-dry clumps of scrub became matters of surpassing interest, for men
measured their agonised retreat and recovery by these things, counting
mechanically and hewing their way back to chosen pebble and branch. There was
no semblance of any concerted fighting. For aught the men knew, the enemy might
be attempting all four sides of the square at once. Their business was to
destroy what lay in front of them, to bayonet in the back those who passed over
them, and, dying, to drag down the slayer till he could be knocked on the head
by some avenging gun-butt.

Dick waited with Torpenhow and a young doctor till the stress grew unendurable.
It was hopeless to attend to the wounded till the attack was repulsed, so the
three moved forward gingerly towards the weakest side of the square. There was
a rush from without, the short hough-hough of the stabbing spears, and a man on
a horse, followed by thirty or forty others, dashed through, yelling and
hacking. The right flank of the square sucked in after them, and the other
sides sent help. The wounded, who knew that they had but a few hours more to
live, caught at the enemy's feet and brought them down, or, staggering into a
discarded rifle, fired blindly into the scuffle that raged in the centre of the
square.

Dick was conscious that somebody had cut him violently across his helmet, that
he had fired his revolver into a black, foam-flecked face which forthwith
ceased to bear any resemblance to a face, and that Torpenhow had gone down
under an Arab whom he had tried to "collar low," and was turning over and over
with his captive, feeling for the man's eyes. The doctor jabbed at a venture
with a bayonet, and a helmetless soldier fired over Dick's shoulder: the flying
grains of powder stung his cheek. It was to Torpenhow that Dick turned by
instinct. The representative of the Central Southern Syndicate had shaken
himself clear of his enemy, and rose, wiping his thumb on his trousers. The
Arab, both hands to his forehead, screamed aloud, then snatched up his spear
and rushed at Torpenhow, who was panting under shelter of Dick's revolver. Dick
fired twice, and the man dropped limply. His upturned face lacked one eye. The
musketry-fire redoubled, but cheers mingled with it. The rush had failed and
the enemy were flying. If the heart of the square were shambles, the ground
beyond was a butcher's shop. Dick thrust his way forward between the maddened
men. The remnant of the enemy were retiring, as the few--the very few--English
cavalry rode down the laggards.

Beyond the lines of the dead, a broad blood-stained Arab spear cast aside in
the retreat lay across a stump of scrub, and beyond this again the illimitable
dark levels of the desert. The sun caught the steel and turned it into a red
disc. Some one behind him was saying, "Ah, get away, you brute!" Dick raised
his revolver and pointed towards the desert. His eye was held by the red splash
in the distance, and the clamour about him seemed to die down to a very far-
away whisper, like the whisper of a level sea. There was the revolver and the
red light. . . . and the voice of some one scaring something away, exactly as
had fallen somewhere before,--a darkness that stung. He fired at random, and
the bullet went out across the desert as he muttered, "Spoilt my aim. There
aren't  any more cartridges. We shall have to run home." He put his hand to his
head and brought it away covered with blood.

"Old man, you're cut rather badly," said Torpenhow. "I owe you something for
this business. Thanks. Stand up! I say, you can't  be ill here."

Throughout the night, when the troops were encamped by the whale-boats, a black
figure danced in the strong moonlight on the sand-bar and shouted that Khartoum
the accursed one was dead,--was dead,--was dead,--that two steamers were rock-
staked on the Nile outside the city, and that of all their crews there remained
not one; and Khartoum was dead,--was dead,--was dead! But Torpenhow took no
heed. He was watching Dick, who called aloud to the restless Nile for Maisie,--
and again Maisie! "Behold a phenomenon," said Torpenhow, rearranging the
blanket. "Here is a man, presumably human, who mentions the name of one woman
only. And I've seen a good deal of delirium, too.--Dick, here's some fizzy
drink."

"Thank you, Maisie," said Dick.

 CHAPTER III

 So he thinks he shall take to the sea again
 For one more cruise with his buccaneers,
 To singe the beard of the King of Spain, And capture another Dean of Jaen
 And sell him in Algiers.
                     --Dutch Picture. Longfellow

THE SOUDAN campaign and Dick's broken head had been some months ended and
mended, and the Central Southern Syndicate had paid Dick a certain sum on
account for work done, which work they were careful to assure him was not
altogether up to their standard. Dick heaved the letter into the Nile at Cairo,
cashed the draft in the same town, and bade a warm farewell to Torpenhow at the
station.

"I am going to lie up for a while and rest," said Torpenhow. "I don't  know
where I shall live in London, but if God brings us to meet, we shall meet.
Are you staying here on the off-chance of another row? There will be none till
the Southern Soudan is reoccupied by our troops. Mark that. Goodbye; bless you;
come back when your money's spent; and give me your address."

Dick loitered in Cairo, Alexandria, Ismailia, and Port Said,--especially Port
Said. There is iniquity in many parts of the world, and vice in all, but the
concentrated essence of all the iniquities and all the vices in all the
continents finds itself at Port Said. And through the heart of that sand-
bordered hell, where the mirage flickers day long above the Bitter Lake, move,
if you will only wait, most of the men and women you have known in this life.
Dick established himself in quarters more riotous than respectable. He spent
his evenings on the quay, and boarded many ships, and saw very many friends,--
gracious Englishwomen with whom he had talked not too wisely in the veranda of
Shepherd's Hotel, hurrying war correspondents, skippers of the contract troop-
ships employed in the campaign, army officers by the score, and others of less
reputable trades.

He had choice of all the races of the East and West for studies, and the
advantage of seeing his subjects under the influence of strong excitement, at
the gaming-tables, saloons, dancing-hells, and elsewhere. For recreation there
was the straight vista of the Canal, the blazing sands, the procession of
shipping, and the white hospitals where the English soldiers lay. He strove to
set down in black and white and colour all that Providence sent him, and when
that supply was ended sought about for fresh material. It was a fascinating
employment, but it ran away with his money, and he had drawn in advance the
hundred and twenty pounds to which he was entitled yearly. "Now I shall have to
work and starve!" thought he, and was addressing himself to this new fate when
a mysterious telegram arrived from Torpenhow in England, which said, "Come
back, quick; you have caught on. Come."

A large smile overspread his face. "So soon! that's a good hearing," said he to
himself. "There will be an orgy tonight. I'll stand or fall by my luck. Faith,
it's time it came!" He deposited half of his funds in the hands of his well-
known friends Monsieur and Madame Binat, and ordered himself a Zanzibar dance
of the finest. Monsieur Binat was shaking with drink, but Madame smiles
sympathetically--"Monsieur needs a chair, of course, and of course Monsieur
will sketch; Monsieur amuses himself strangely."

Binat raised a blue-white face from a cot in the inner room. "I understand," he
quavered. "We all know Monsieur. Monsieur is an artist, as I have been." Dick
nodded. "In the end," said Binat, with gravity, "Monsieur will descend alive
into hell, as I have descended." And he laughed.

"You must come to the dance, too," said Dick; "I shall want you."

"For my face? I knew it would be so. For my face? My God! and for my
degradation so tremendous! I will not. Take him away. He is a devil. Or at
least do thou, Celeste, demand of him more." The excellent Binat began to kick
and scream.

"All things are for sale in Port Said," said Madame. "If my husband comes it
will be so much more. Eh, "how you call 'alf a sovereign."

 The money was paid, and the mad dance was held at night in a walled courtyard
at the back of Madame Binat's house. The lady herself, in faded mauve silk
always about to slide from her yellow shoulders, played the piano, and to the
tin-pot music of a Western waltz the naked Zanzibari girls danced furiously by
the light of kerosene lamps. Binat sat upon a chair and stared with eyes that
saw nothing, till the whirl of the dance and the clang of the rattling piano
stole into the drink that took the place of blood in his veins, and his face
glistened. Dick took him by the chin brutally and turned that face to the
light. Madame Binat looked over her shoulder and smiled with many teeth. Dick
leaned against the wall and sketched for an hour, till the kerosene lamps began
to smell, and the girls threw themselves panting on the hard-beaten ground.
Then he shut his book with a snap and moved away, Binat plucking feebly at his
elbow. "Show me," he whimpered. "I too was once an artist, even I!" Dick showed
him the rough sketch. "Am I that?" he screamed. "Will you take that away with
you and show all the world that it is I,--Binat?" He moaned and wept.

"Monsieur has paid for all," said Madame. "To the pleasure of seeing Monsieur
again."

The courtyard gate shut, and Dick hurried up the sandy street to the nearest
gambling-hell, where he was well known. "If the luck holds, it's an omen; if I
lose, I must stay here." He placed his money picturesquely about the board,
hardly daring to look at what he did. The luck held.

Three turns of the wheel left him richer by twenty pounds, and he went down to
the shipping to make friends with the captain of a decayed cargo-steamer, who
landed him in London with fewer pounds in his pocket than he cared to think
about.

A thin gray fog hung over the city, and the streets were very cold; for summer
was in England.

"It's a cheerful wilderness, and it hasn't  the knack of altering much," Dick
thought, as he tramped from the Docks westward. "Now, what must I do?"

The packed houses gave no answer. Dick looked down the long lightless streets
and at the appalling rush of traffic. "Oh, you rabbit-hutches!" said he,
addressing a row of highly respectable semi-detached residences. "Do you know
what you"ve got to do later on? You have to supply me with men-servants and
maid-servants,"--here he smacked his lips,--"and the peculiar treasure of
kings. Meantime I'll clothes and boots, and presently I will return and trample
on you." He stepped forward energetically; he saw that one of his shoes was
burst at the side. As he stooped to make investigations, a man jostled him into
the gutter. "All right," he said. "That"s another nick in the score. I'll
jostle you later on."

Good clothes and boots are not cheap, and Dick left his last shop with the
certainty that he would be respectably arrayed for a time, but with only fifty
shillings in his pocket. He returned to streets by the Docks, and lodged
himself in one room, where the sheets on the bed were almost audibly marked in
case of theft, and where nobody seemed to go to bed at all. When his clothes
arrived he sought the Central Southern Syndicate for Torpenhow's address, and
got it, with the intimation that there was still some money waiting for him.

"How much?" said Dick, as one who habitually dealt in millions.

"Between thirty and forty pounds. If it would be any convenience to you, of
course we could let you have it at once; but we usually settle accounts
monthly."

"If I show that I want anything now, I'm lost," he said to himself. "All I need
I'll take later on." Then, aloud, "It"s hardly worth while; and I'm going to
the country for a month, too. Wait till I come back, and I'll see about it."

"But we trust, Mr. Heldar, that you do not intend to sever your connection with
us?"

 Dick's business in life was the study of faces, and he watched the speaker
keenly. "That man means something," he said. "I'll do no business till I"ve
seen Torpenhow. There's a big deal coming." So he departed, making no promises,
to his one little room by the Docks. And that day was the seventh of the month,
and that month, he reckoned with awful distinctness, had thirty-one days in it!
It is not easy for a man of catholic tastes and healthy appetites to exist for
twenty-four days on fifty shillings. Nor is it cheering to begin the experiment
alone in all the loneliness of London. Dick paid seven shillings a week for his
lodging, which left him rather less than a shilling a day for food and drink.
Naturally, his first purchase was of the materials of his craft; he had been
without them too long. Half a day's investigations and comparison brought him
to the conclusion that sausages and mashed potatoes, twopence a plate, were the
best food. Now, sausages once or twice a week for breakfast are not unpleasant.
As lunch, even, with mashed potatoes, they become monotonous. At dinner they
are impertinent. At the end of three days Dick loathed sausages, and, going,
forth, pawned his watch to revel on sheep"s head, which is not as cheap as it
looks, owing to the bones and the gravy. Then he returned to sausages and
mashed potatoes. Then he confined himself entirely to mashed potatoes for a
day, and was unhappy because of pain in his inside. Then he pawned his
waistcoat and his tie, and thought regretfully of money thrown away in times
past. There are few things more edifying unto Art than the actual belly-pinch
of hunger, and Dick in his few walks abroad,--he did not care for exercise; it
raised desires that could not be satisfied--found himself dividing mankind into
two classes,--those who looked as if they might give him something to eat, and
those who looked otherwise. "I never knew what I had to learn about the human
face before," he thought; and, as a reward for his humility, Providence caused
a cab-driver at a sausage-shop where Dick fed that night to leave half eaten a
great chunk of bread. Dick took it,--would have fought all the world for its
possession,--and it cheered him.

The month dragged through at last, and, nearly prancing with impatience, he
went to draw his money. Then he hastened to Torpenhow"s address and smelt the
smell of cooking meats all along the corridors of the chambers. Torpenhow was
on the top floor, and Dick burst into his room, to be received with a hug which
nearly cracked his ribs, as Torpenhow dragged him to the light and spoke of
twenty different things in the same breath.

"But you're looking tucked up," he concluded.

"Got anything to eat?" said Dick, his eye roaming round the room.

"I shall be having breakfast in a minute. What do you say to sausages?"

"No, anything but sausages! Torp, I've been starving on that accursed horse-
flesh for thirty days and thirty nights."

"Now, what lunacy has been your latest?"

Dick spoke of the last few weeks with unbridled speech. Then he opened his
coat; there was no waistcoat below. "I ran it fine, awfully fine, but I've just
scraped through."                  

"You haven't  much sense, but you've got a backbone, anyhow. Eat, and talk
afterwards." Dick fell upon eggs and bacon and gorged till he could gorge no
more. Torpenhow handed him a filled pipe, and he smoked as men smoke who for
three weeks have been deprived of good tobacco.

"Ouf!" said he. "That's heavenly! Well?"

"Why in the world didn't  you come to me?"

"Couldn't; I owe you too much already, old man. Besides I had a sort of
superstition that this temporary starvation--that's what it was, and it hurt--
would bring me luck later. It's over and done with now, and none of the
syndicate know how hard up I was. Fire away. What's the exact state of affairs
as regards myself?"

"You had my wire? You've caught on here. People like your work immensely. I
don't  know why, but they do. They say you have a fresh touch and a new way of
drawing things. And, because they're chiefly home-bred English, they say you
have insight. You're wanted by half a dozen papers; you're wanted to illustrate
books."

Dick grunted scornfully.

"You're wanted to work up your smaller sketches and sell them to the dealers.
They seem to think the money sunk in you is a good investment. Good Lord! who
can account for the fathomless folly of the public?"

"They're a remarkably sensible people."

"They are subject to fits, if that's what you mean; and you happen to be the
object of the latest fit among those who are interested in what they call Art.
Just now you're a fashion, a phenomenon, or whatever you please. I appeared to
be the only person who knew anything about you here, and I have been showing
the most useful men a few of the sketches you gave me from time to time. Those
coming after your work on the Central Southern Syndicate appear to have done
your business. You're in luck."

"Huh! call it luck! Do call it luck, when a man has been kicking about the
world like a dog, waiting for it to come! I'll luck 'em later on. I want a
place to work first."

"Come here," said Torpenhow, crossing the landing. "This place is a big box
room really, but it will do for you. There's your skylight, or your north
light, or whatever window you call it, and plenty of room to thrash about in,
and a bedroom beyond. What more do you need?"

"Good enough," said Dick, looking round the large room that took up a third of
a top story in the rickety chambers overlooking the Thames. A pale yellow sun
shone through the skylight and showed the much dirt of the place. Three steps
led from the door to the landing, and three more to Torpenhow's room. The well
of the staircase disappeared into darkness, pricked by tiny gas-jets, and there
were sounds of men talking and doors slamming seven flights below, in the warm
gloom.

"Do they give you a free hand here?" said Dick, cautiously. He was Ishmael
enough to know the value of liberty.

"Anything you like; latch-keys and license unlimited. We are permanent tenants
for the most part here. 'Tisn't  a place I would recommend for a Young Men's
Christian Association, but it will serve. I took these rooms for you when I
wired."

 "You're a great deal too kind, old man."

"You didn't  suppose you were going away from me, did you?" Torpenhow put his
hand on Dick's shoulder, and the two walked up and down the room, henceforward
to be called the studio, in sweet and silent communion. They heard rapping at
Torpenhow's door. "That's some ruffian come up for a drink," said Torpenhow;
and he raised his voice cheerily. There entered no one more ruffianly than a
portly middle-aged gentleman in a satin-faced frockcoat. His lips were parted
and pale, and there were deep pouches under the eyes.

"Weak heart," said Dick to himself, and, as he shook hands, "very weak heart.
His pulse is shaking his fingers."

The man introduced himself as the head of the Central Southern Syndicate and
"one of the most ardent admirers of your work, Mr. Heldar. I assure you, in the
name of the syndicate, that we are immensely indebted to you; and I trust, Mr.
Heldar, you won't  forget that we were largely instrumental in bringing you
before the public." He panted because of the seven flights of stairs.

Dick glanced at Torpenhow, whose left eyelid lay for a moment dead on his
cheek.

"I shan't  forget," said Dick, every instinct of defence roused in him.

"You've paid me so well that I couldn't, you know. By the way, when I am
settled in this place I should like to send and get my sketches. There must be
nearly a hundred and fifty of them with you."

"That is er--is what I came to speak about. I fear we can't  allow it exactly,
Mr. Heldar. In the absence of any specified agreement, the sketches are our
property, of course."

"Do you mean to say that you are going to keep them?"

"Yes; and we hope to have your help, on your own terms, Mr. Heldar, to assist
us in arranging a little exhibition, which, backed by our name and the
influence we naturally command among the press, should be of material service
to you. Sketches such as yours----"

"Belong to me. You engaged me by wire, you paid me the lowest rates you dared.
You can't  mean to keep them! Good God alive, man, they're all I've got in the
world!"

Torpenhow watched Dick"s face and whistled.

Dick walked up and down, thinking. He saw the whole of his little stock in
trade, the first weapon of his equipment, annexed at the outset of his campaign
by an elderly gentleman whose name Dick had not caught aright, who said that he
represented a syndicate, which was a thing for which Dick had not the least
reverence. The injustice of the proceedings did not much move him; he had seen
the strong hand prevail too often in other places to be squeamish over the
moral aspects of right and wrong.

But he ardently desired the blood of the gentleman in the frockcoat, and when
he spoke again, it was with a strained sweetness that Torpenhow knew well for
the beginning of strife.

"Forgive me, sir, but you have no--no younger man who can arrange this business
with me?"

"I speak for the syndicate. I see no reason for a third party to----"

"You will in a minute. Be good enough to give back my sketches."

The man stared blankly at Dick, and then at Torpenhow, who was leaning against
the wall. He was not used to ex-employees who ordered him to be good enough to
do things.

"Yes, it is rather a cold-blooded steal," said Torpenhow, critically; "but I'm
afraid, I am very much afraid, you've struck the wrong man. Be careful, Dick;
remember, this isn't  the Soudan."

"Considering what services the syndicate have done you in putting your name
before the world----"

This was not a fortunate remark; it reminded Dick of certain vagrant years
lived out in loneliness and strife and unsatisfied desires. The memory did not
contrast well with the prosperous gentleman who proposed to enjoy the fruit of
those years.

"I don't  know quite what to do with you," began Dick, meditatively. "Of course
you're a thief, and you ought to be half killed, but in your case you'd
probably die. I don't  want you dead on this floor, and, besides, it's unlucky
just as one"s moving in. Don't  hit, sir; you'll only excite yourself."

He put one hand on the man's forearm and ran the other down the plump body
beneath the coat. "My goodness!" said he to Torpenhow, "and this gray oaf dares
to be a thief! I have seen an Esneh camel-driver have the black hide taken off
his body in strips for stealing half a pound of wet dates, and he was as tough
as whipcord. This thing's soft all over--like a woman."

There are few things more poignantly humiliating than being handled by a man
who does not intend to strike. The head of the syndicate began to breathe
heavily. Dick walked round him, pawing him, as a cat paws a soft hearth-rug.
Then he traced with his forefinger the leaden pouches underneath the eyes, and
shook his head. "You were going to steal my things,--mine, mine, mine!--you,
who don't  know when you may die. Write a note to your office,--you say you're
the head of it,--and order them to give Torpenhow my sketches,--every one of
them. Wait a minute: your hand's shaking. Now!" He thrust a pocket-book before
him. The note was written. Torpenhow took it and departed without a word, while
Dick walked round and round the spellbound captive, giving him such advice as
he conceived best for the welfare of his soul. When Torpenhow returned with a
gigantic portfolio, he heard Dick say, almost soothingly, "Now, I hope this
will be a lesson to you; and if you worry me when I have settled down to work
with any nonsense about actions for assault, believe me, I'll catch you and
manhandle you, and you'll die. You haven't  very long to live, anyhow. Go!
Imshi, Vootsak,--get out!" The man departed, staggering and dazed. Dick drew a
long breath: "Phew! what a lawless lot these people are! The first thing a poor
orphan meets is gang robbery, organised burglary! Think of the hideous
blackness of that man's mind! Are my sketches all right, Torp?"

"Yes; one hundred and forty-seven of them. Well, I must say, Dick, you've begun
well."

"He was interfering with me. It only meant a few pounds to him, but it was
everything to me. I don't  think he'll bring an action. I gave him some medical
advice gratis about the state of his body. It was cheap at the little flurry it
cost him. Now, let's look at my things."

Two minutes later Dick had thrown himself down on the floor and was deep in the
portfolio, chuckling lovingly as he turned the drawings over and thought of the
price at which they had been bought.

The afternoon was well advanced when Torpenhow came to the door and saw Dick
dancing a wild saraband under the skylight.

"I builded better than I knew, Torp," he said, without stopping the dance.
"They're good! They're damned good! They'll go like flame! I shall have an
exhibition of them on my own brazen hook. And that man would have cheated me
out of it! Do you know that I'm sorry now that I didn't  actually hit him?"

"Go out," said Torpenhow,--"go out and pray to be delivered from the sin of
arrogance, which you never will be. Bring your things up from whatever place
you're staying in, and we"ll try to make this barn a little more shipshape."

"And then--oh, then," said Dick, still capering, "we will spoil the Egyptians!"

 CHAPTER IV
                                        
 The wolf-cub at even lay hid in the corn,
 When the smoke of the cooking hung gray:
 He knew where the doe made a couch for her fawn,
 And he looked to his strength for his prey.

 But the moon swept the smoke-wreaths away.

 And he turned from his meal in the villager"s close,
 And he bayed to the moon as she rose.
           --In Seonee.

"WELL, and how does success taste?" said Torpenhow, some three months later. He
had just returned to chambers after a holiday in the country.

"Good," said Dick, as he sat licking his lips before the easel in the studio.

"I want more,--heaps more. The lean years have passed, and I approve of these
fat ones."

"Be careful, old man. That way lies bad work."

Torpenhow was sprawling in a long chair with a small fox-terrier asleep on his
chest, while Dick was preparing a canvas. A dais, a background, and a lay-
figure were the only fixed objects in the place. They rose from a wreck of
oddments that began with felt-covered water-bottles, belts, and regimental
badges, and ended with a small bale of second-hand uniforms and a stand of
mixed arms. The mark of muddy feet on the dais showed that a military model had
just gone away. The watery autumn sunlight was falling, and shadows sat in the
corners of the studio.

"Yes," said Dick, deliberately, "I like the power; I like the fun; I like the
fuss; and above all I like the money. I almost like the people who make the
fuss and pay the money. Almost. But they're a queer gang,--an amazingly queer
gang!"

"They have been good enough to you, at any rate. That tin-pot exhibition of
your sketches must have paid. Did you see that the papers called it the 'Wild
Work Show'?"

"Never mind. I sold every shred of canvas I wanted to; and, on my word, I
believe it was because they believed I was a self-taught flagstone artist. I
should have got better prices if I worked my things on wool or scratched them
on camel-bone instead of using mere black and white and colour. Verily, they
are a queer gang, these people. Limited isn't  the word to describe 'em. I met
a fellow the other day who told me that it was impossible that shadows on white
sand should be blue,--ultramarine,--as they are. I found out, later, that the
man had been as far as Brighton beach; but he knew all about Art, confound him.
He gave me a lecture on it, and recommended me to go to school to learn
technique. I wonder what old Kami would have said to that."

"When were you under Kami, man of extraordinary beginnings?"

"I studied with him for two years in Paris. He taught by personal magnetism.
All he ever said was, 'Continuez, mes enfants,' and you had to make the best
you could of that. He had a divine touch, and he knew something about colour.
Kami used to dream colour; I swear he could never have seen the genuine
article; but he evolved it; and it was good."

"Recollect some of those views in the Soudan?" said Torpenhow, with a provoking
drawl.

Dick squirmed in his place. "Don't! It makes me want to get out there again.
What colour that was! Opal and umber and amber and claret and brick-red and
sulphur--cockatoo-crest-sulphur--against brown, with a nigger-black rock
sticking up in the middle of it all, and a decorative frieze of camels
festooning in front of a pure pale turquoise sky." He began to walk up and
down. "And yet, you know, if you try to give these people the thing as God gave
it, keyed down to their comprehension and according to the powers He has given
you----"

"Modest man! Go on."

"Half a dozen epicene young pagans who haven't  even been to Algiers will tell
you, first, that your notion is borrowed, and, secondly, that it isn't  Art."

"This comes of my leaving town for a month. Dickie, you've been promenading
among the toy-shops and hearing people talk."

"I couldn't  help it," said Dick, penitently. "You weren't  here, and it was
lonely these long evenings. A man can't  work for ever."

"A man might have gone to a pub, and got decently drunk."

"I wish I had; but I forgathered with some men of sorts. They said they were
artists, and I knew some of them could draw,--but they wouldn't  draw. They
gave me tea,--tea at five in the afternoon!--and talked about Art and the state
of their souls. As if their souls mattered. I've heard more about Art and seen
less of her in the last six months than in the whole of my life. Do you
remember Cassavetti, who worked for some continental syndicate, out with the
desert column? He was a regular Christmas-tree of contraptions when he took the
field in full fig, with his water-bottle, lanyard, revolver, writing-case,
housewife, gig-lamps, and the Lord knows what all. He used to fiddle about with
'em and show us how they worked; but he never seemed to do much except fudge
his reports from the Nilghai. See?"

"Dear old Nilghai! He's in town, fatter than ever. He ought to be up here this
evening. I see the comparison perfectly. You should have kept clear of all that
man-millinery. Serves you right; and I hope it will unsettle your mind."

"It won't. It has taught me what Art--holy sacred Art--means."

"You've learnt something while I've been away. What is Art?"

"Give 'em what they know, and when you've done it once do it again."

Dick dragged forward a canvas laid face to the wall. "Here's a sample of real
Art. It's going to be a facsimile reproduction for a weekly. I called it 'His
Last Shot.' It"s worked up from the little water-colour I made outside El
Maghrib. Well, I lured my model, a beautiful rifleman, up here with drink; I
drored him, and I redrored him, and I redrored him, and I made him a flushed,
dishevelled, bedevilled scallawag, with his helmet at the back of his head, and
the living fear of death in his eye, and the blood oozing out of a cut over his
ankle-bone. He wasn't  pretty, but he was all soldier and very much man."

"Once more, modest child!"

Dick laughed. "Well, it's only to you I'm talking. I did him just as well as I
knew how, making allowance for the slickness of oils. Then the art-manager of
that abandoned paper said that his subscribers wouldn't  like it. It was brutal
and coarse and violent,--man being naturally gentle when he's fighting for his
life. They wanted something more restful, with a little more colour. I could
have said a good deal, but you might as well talk to a sheep as an art-manager.
I took my 'Last Shot' back. Behold the result! I put him into a lovely red coat
without a speck on it. That is Art. I polished his boots,--observe the high
light on the toe. That is Art. I cleaned his rifle,--rifles are always clean on
service,--because that is Art. I pipeclayed his helmet,--pipeclay is always
used on active service, and is indispensable to Art. I shaved his chin, I
washed his hands, and gave him an air of fatted peace. Result, military
tailor's pattern-plate. Price, thank Heaven, twice as much as for the first
sketch, which was moderately decent."

"And do you suppose you're going to give that thing out as your work?"

"Why not? I did it. Alone I did it, in the interests of sacred, home-bred Art
and Dickenson's Weekly."

Torpenhow smoked in silence for a while. Then came the verdict, delivered from
rolling clouds: "If you were only a mass of blathering vanity, Dick, I wouldn't 
mind,--I'd let you go to the deuce on your own mahl-stick; but when I consider
what you are to me, and when I find that to vanity you add the twopenny-
halfpenny pique of a twelve-year-old girl, then I bestir myself in your behalf.
Thus!"

The canvas ripped as Torpenhow"s booted foot shot through it, and the terrier
jumped down, thinking rats were about.

"If you have any bad language to use, use it. You have not. I continue. You are
an idiot, because no man born of woman is strong enough to take liberties with
his public, even though they be--which they ain't--all you say they are."

"But they don't  know any better. What can you expect from creatures born and
bred in this light?" Dick pointed to the yellow fog. "If they want furniture-
polish, let them have furniture-polish, so long as they pay for it. They are
only men and women. You talk as if they were gods."

"That sounds very fine, but it has nothing to do with the case. They are they
people you have to do work for, whether you like it or not. They are your
masters. Don'tbe deceived, Dickie, you aren't  strong enough to trifle with
them,--or with yourself, which is more important.

Moreover,--Come back, Binkie: that red daub isn't  going anywhere,--unless you
take precious good care, you will fall under the damnation of the check-book,
and that's worse than death. You will get drunk--you're half drunk already--on
easily acquired money. For that money and you own infernal vanity you are
willing to deliberately turn out bad work. You'll do quite enough bad work
without knowing it. And, Dickie, as I love you and as I know you love me, I am
not going to let you cut off your nose to spite your face for all the gold in
England. That's settled. Now swear."

"Don't know, said Dick. "I've been trying to make myself angry, but I can"t,
you're so abominably reasonable. There will be a row on Dickenson's Weekly, I
fancy."

"Why the Dickenson do you want to work on a weekly paper? It's slow bleeding of
power."

"It brings in the very desirable dollars," said Dick, his hands in his pockets.

Torpenhow watched him with large contempt. "Why, I thought it was a man!" said
he. "It's a child."

"No, it isn't," said Dick, wheeling quickly. "You've no notion what the
certainty of cash means to a man who has always wanted it badly. Nothing will
pay me for some of my life's joys; on that Chinese pig-boat, for instance, when
we ate bread and jam for every meal, because Ho-Wang wouldn't  allow us
anything better, and it all tasted of pig,--Chinese pig. I've worked for this,
I've sweated and I've starved for this, line on line and month after month. And
now I've got it I am going to make the most of it while it lasts. Let them pay-
-they've no knowledge."

"What does Your Majesty please to want? You can't  smoke more than you do; you
won't  drink; you're a gross feeder; and you dress in the dark, by the look of
you. You wouldn't  keep a horse the other day when I suggested, because, you
said, it might fall lame, and whenever you cross the street you take a hansom.
Even you are not foolish enough to suppose that theatres and all the live
things you can by thereabouts mean Life. What earthly need have you for money?"

"It's there, bless its golden heart," said Dick. "It's there all the time.
Providence has sent me nuts while I have teeth to crack 'em with. I haven't 
yet found the nut I wish to crack, but I'm keeping my teeth filed. Perhaps some
day you and I will go for a walk round the wide earth."

"With no work to do, nobody to worry us, and nobody to compete with? You would
be unfit to speak to in a week. Besides, I shouldn't  go. I don't  care to
profit by the price of a man's soul,--for that's what it would mean. Dick, it's
no use arguing. You're a fool."

"Don't  see it. When I was on that Chinese pig-boat, our captain got credit for
saving about twenty-five thousand very seasick little pigs, when our old tramp
of a steamer fell foul of a timber-junk. Now, taking those pigs as a parallel--
--"

"Oh, confound your parallels! Whenever I try to improve your soul, you always
drag in some anecdote from your very shady past. Pigs aren't  the British
public; and self-respect is self-respect the world over. Go out for a walk and
try to catch some self-respect. And, I say, if the Nilghai comes up this
evening can I show him your diggings?"

"Surely." And Dick departed, to take counsel with himself in the rapidly
gathering London fog.

Half an hour after he had left, the Nilghai laboured up the staircase. He was
the chiefest, as he was the youngest, of the war correspondents, and his
experiences dated from the birth of the needle-gun. Saving only his ally, Keneu
the Great War Eagle, there was no man higher in the craft than he, and he
always opened his conversation with the news that there would be trouble in the
Balkans in the spring. Torpenhow laughed as he entered.

"Never mind the trouble in the Balkans. Those little states are always
screeching. You've heard about Dick's luck?"

"Yes; he has been called up to notoriety, hasn't  he? I hope you keep him
properly humble. He wants suppressing from time to time."

"He does. He's beginning to take liberties with what he thinks is his
reputation."

"Already! By Jove, he has cheek! I don't  know about his reputation, but he'll
come a cropper if he tries that sort of thing."

"So I told him. I don't  think he believes it."

"They never do when they first start off. What's that wreck on the ground
there?"

"Specimen of his latest impertinence." Torpenhow thrust the torn edges of the
canvas together and showed the well-groomed picture to the Nilghai, who looked
at it for a moment and whistled.

"It's a chromo," said he,--"a chromo-litholeomargarine fake! What possessed him
to do it? And yet how thoroughly he has caught the note that catches a public
who think with their boots and read with their elbows! The cold-blooded
insolence of the work almost saves it; but he mustn't  go on with this. Hasn't 
he been praised and cockered up too much? You know these people here have no
sense of proportion. They'll call him a second Detaille and a third-hand
Meissonier while his fashion lasts. It's windy diet for a colt."

"I don't  think it affects Dick much. You might as well call a young wolf a
lion and expect him to take the compliment in exchange for a shin-bone. Dick's
soul is in the bank. He's working for cash."

"Now he has thrown up war work, I suppose he doesn't  see that the obligations
of the service are just the same, only the proprietors are changed."

"How should he know? He thinks he is his own master."

"Does he? I could undeceive him for his good, if there's any virtue in print.
He wants the whiplash."

"Lay it on with science, then. I'd flay him myself, but I like him too much."

"I've no scruples. He had the audacity to try to cut me out with a woman at
Cairo once. I forgot that, but I remember now."

"Did he cut you out?"

"You'll see when I have dealt with him. But, after all, what's the good? Leave
him alone and he'll come home, if he has any stuff in him, dragging or wagging
his tail behind him. There's more in a week of life than in a lively weekly.
None the less I'll slate him. I'll slate him ponderously in the Cataclysm."

"Good luck to you; but I fancy nothing short of a crowbar would make Dick
wince. His soul seems to have been fired before we came across him. He"s
intensely suspicious and utterly lawless."

"Matter of temper," said the Nilghai. "It's the same with horses. Some you
wallop and they work, some you wallop and they jib, and some you wallop and
they go out for a walk with their hands in their pockets."

"That's exactly what Dick has done," said Torpenhow. "Wait till he comes back.
In the meantime, you can begin your slating here. I'll show you some of his
last and worst work in his studio."

Dick had instinctively sought running water for a comfort to his mood of mind.
He was leaning over the Embankment wall, watching the rush of the Thames
through the arches of Westminster Bridge. He began by thinking of Torpenhow's
advice, but, as of custom, lost himself in the study of the faces flocking
past. Some had death written on their features, and Dick marvelled that they
could laugh. Others, clumsy and coarse-built for the most part, were alight
with love; others were merely drawn and lined with work; but there was
something, Dick knew, to be made out of them all. The poor at least should
suffer that he might learn, and the rich should pay for the output of his
learning. Thus his credit in the world and his cash balance at the bank would
be increased. So much the better for him. He had suffered. Now he would take
toll of the ills of others.

The fog was driven apart for a moment, and the sun shone, a blood-red wafer, on
the water. Dick watched the spot till he heard the voice of the tide between
the piers die down like the wash of the sea at low tide. A girl hard pressed by
her lover shouted shamelessly, "Ah, get away, you beast!" and a shift of the
same wind that had opened the fog drove across Dick"s face the black smoke of a
river-steamer at her berth below the wall. He was blinded for the moment, then
spun round and found himself face to face with--Maisie.

There was no mistaking. The years had turned the child to a woman, but they had
not altered the dark-gray eyes, the thin scarlet lips, or the firmly modelled
mouth and chin; and, that all should be as it was of old, she wore a closely
fitting gray dress.

Since the human soul is finite and not in the least under its own command,
Dick, advancing, said "Halloo!" after the manner of schoolboys, and Maisie
answered, "Oh, Dick, is that you?" Then, against his will, and before the brain
newly released from considerations of the cash balance had time to dictate to
the nerves, every pulse of Dick's body throbbed furiously and his palate dried
in his mouth. The fog shut down again, and Maisie's face was pearl-white
through it. No word was spoken, but Dick fell into step at her side, and the
two paced the Embankment together, keeping the step as perfectly as in their
afternoon excursions to the mud-flats. Then Dick, a little hoarsely--"What has
happened to Amomma?"

"He died, Dick. Not cartridges; over-eating. He was always greedy. Isn't  it
funny?"

"Yes. No. Do you mean Amomma?"

"Ye--es. No. This. Where have you come from?"

"Over there," He pointed eastward through the fog. "And you?"

"Oh, I'm in the north,--the black north, across all the Park. I am very busy."

"What do you do?"

"I paint a great deal. That's all I have to do."

"Why, what's happened? You had three hundred a year."

"I have that still. I am painting; that's all."

"Are you alone, then?"

"There's a girl living with me. Don't  walk so fast, Dick; you're out of step."

"Then you noticed it too?"

"Of course I did. You're always out of step."

"So I am. I'm sorry. You went on with the painting?"

"Of course. I said I should. I was at the Slade, then at Merton"s in St. John's
Wood, the big studio, then I pepper-potted,--I mean I went to the National,--
and now I'm working under Kami."

"But Kami is in Paris surely?"

"No; he has his teaching studio in Vitry-sur-Marne. I work with him in the
summer, and I live in London in the winter. I'm a householder."

"Do you sell much?"

"Now and again, but not often. There is my 'bus. I must take it or lose half an
hour. Goodbye, Dick."

"Goodbye, Maisie. Won't  you tell me where you live? I must see you again; and
perhaps I could help you. I--I paint a little myself."

"I may be in the Park tomorrow, if there is no working light. I walk from the
Marble Arch down and back again; that is my little excursion. But of course I
shall see you again." She stepped into the omnibus and was swallowed up by the
fog.

"Well--I--am--damned!" exclaimed Dick, and returned to the chambers.

Torpenhow and the Nilghai found him sitting on the steps to the studio door,
repeating the phrase with an awful gravity.

"You'll be more damned when I'm done with you," said the Nilghai, upheaving his
bulk from behind Torpenhow's shoulder and waving a sheaf of half-dry
manuscript. "Dick, it is of common report that you are suffering from swelled
head."

"Halloo, Nilghai. Back again? How are the Balkans and all the little Balkans?
One side of your face is out of drawing, as usual."

"Never mind that. I am commissioned to smite you in print. Torpenhow refuses
from false delicacy. I've been overhauling the pot-boilers in your studio. They
are simply disgraceful."

"Oho! that"s it, is it? If you think you can slate me, you're wrong. You can
only describe, and you need as much room to turn in, on paper, as a P. and O.
cargo-boat. But continue, and be swift. I'm going to bed."

"H'm! h'm! h'm! The first part only deals with your pictures. Here"s the
peroration: 'For work done without conviction, for power wasted on
trivialities, for labour expended with levity for the deliberate purpose of
winning the easy applause of a fashion-driven public----"

"That's "His Last Shot," second edition. Go on."

"----'public, there remains but one end,--the oblivion that is preceded by
toleration and cenotaphed with contempt. From that fate Mr. Heldar has yet to
prove himself out of danger."

"Wow--wow--wow--wow--wow!" said Dick, profanely. "It's a clumsy ending and vile
journalese, but it's quite true. And yet,"--he sprang to his feet and snatched
at the manuscript,--"you scarred, deboshed, battered old gladiator! you're sent
out when a war begins, to minister to the blind, brutal, British public's
bestial thirst for blood. They have no arenas now, but they must have special
correspondents. You're a fat gladiator who comes up through a trap-door and
talks of what he's seen. You stand on precisely the same level as an energetic
bishop, an affable actress, a devastating cyclone, or--mine own sweet self. And
you presume to lecture me about my work! Nilghai, if it were worth while I'd
caricature you in four papers!"

The Nilghai winced. He had not thought of this.

"As it is, I shall take this stuff and tear it small--so!" The manuscript
fluttered in slips down the dark well of the staircase. "Go home, Nilghai," 
said Dick; "go home to your lonely little bed, and leave me in peace. I am
about to turn in till to morrow."

"Why, it isn't  seven yet!" said Torpenhow, with amazement.

"It shall be two in the morning, if I choose," said Dick, backing to the studio
door. "I go to grapple with a serious crisis, and I shan't  want any dinner."

The door shut and was locked.

"What can you do with a man like that?" said the Nilghai.

"Leave him alone. He's as mad as a hatter."

At eleven there was a kicking on the studio door. "Is the Nilghai with you
still?" said a voice from within. "Then tell him he might have condensed the
whole of his lumbering nonsense into an epigram: 'Only the free are bond, and
only the bond are free.' Tell him he's an idiot, Torp, and tell him I'm
another."

"All right. Come out and have supper. You're smoking on an empty stomach."

There was no answer.

 CHAPTER V

 "I have a thousand men," said he,
 "To wait upon my will,
 And towers nine upon the Tyne,
 And three upon the Till."

 "And what care I for you men," said she,
 "Or towers from Tyne to Till,
 "Sith you must go with me," she said,
 "To wait upon my will?"
                 --Sir Hoggie and the Fairies

Next morning Torpenhow found Dick sunk in deepest repose of tobacco.

"Well, madman, how d'you feel?"

"I don't know. I'm trying to find out."

"You had much better do some work."

"Maybe; but I'm in no hurry. I've made a discovery. Torp, there's too much Ego
in my Cosmos."

"Not really! Is this revelation due to my lectures, or the Nilghai's?"

"It came to me suddenly, all on my own account. Much too much Ego; and now I'm
going to work."

He turned over a few half-finished sketches, drummed on a new canvas, cleaned
three brushes, set Binkie to bite the toes of the lay figure, rattled through
his collection of arms and accoutrements, and then went out abruptly, declaring
that he had done enough for the day.

"This is positively indecent," said Torpenhow, "and the first time that Dick
has ever broken up a light morning. Perhaps he has found out that he has a
soul, or an artistic temperament, or something equally valuable. That comes of
leaving him alone for a month. Perhaps he has been going out of evenings. I
must look to this." He rang for the bald-headed old housekeeper, whom nothing
could astonish or annoy.

"Beeton, did Mr. Heldar dine out at all while I was out of town?"

"Never laid 'is dress-clothes out once, sir, all the time. Mostly 'e dined in;
but 'e brought some most remarkable young gentlemen up 'ere after theatres once
or twice. Remarkable fancy they was. You gentlemen on the top floor does very
much as you likes, but it do seem to me, sir, droppin' a walkin'-stick down
five flights o' stairs an' then goin' down four abreast to pick it up again at
half-past two in the mornin', singin' 'Bring back the whiskey, Willie
darlin','--not once or twice, but scores o' times,--isn't charity to the other
tenants. What I say is, 'Do as you would be done by.' That's my motto."

"Of course! of course! I'm afraid the top floor isn't the quietest in the
house."

"I make no complaints, sir. I have spoke to Mr. Heldar friendly, an' he
laughed, an' did me a picture of the missis that is as good as a coloured
print. It 'asn't the high shine of a photograph, but what I say is, 'Never look
a gift-horse in the mouth."'Mr. Heldar's dress-clothes 'aven't been on him for
weeks."

"Then it's all right," said Torpenhow to himself. "Orgies are healthy, and Dick
has a head of his own, but when it comes to women making eyes I'm not so
certain,--Binkie, never you be a man, little dorglums. They're contrary brutes,
and they do things without any reason."

Dick had turned northward across the Park, but he was walking in the spirit on
the mud-flats with Maisie. He laughed aloud as he remembered the day when he
had decked Amomma's horns with the ham-frills, and Maisie, white with rage, had
cuffed him. How long those four years seemed in review, and how closely Maisie
was connected with every hour of them! Storm across the sea, and Maisie in a
gray dress on the beach, sweeping her drenched hair out of her eyes and
laughing at the homeward race of the fishing-smacks; hot sunshine on the mud-
flats, and Maisie sniffing scornfully, with her chin in the air; Maisie flying
before the wind that threshed the foreshore and drove the sand like small shot
about her ears; Maisie, very composed and independent, telling lies to Mrs.
Jennett while Dick supported her with coarser perjuries; Maisie picking her way
delicately from stone to stone, a pistol in her hand and her teeth firm-set;
and Maisie in a gray dress sitting on the grass between the mouth of a cannon
and a nodding yellow sea-poppy. The pictures passed before him one by one, and
the last stayed the longest.

Dick was perfectly happy with a quiet peace that was as new to his mind as it
was foreign to his experiences. It never occurred to him that there might be
other calls upon his time than loafing across the Park in the forenoon.

"There's a good working light now," he said, watching his shadow placidly.
"Some poor devil ought to be grateful for this. And there's Maisie."

She was walking towards him from the Marble Arch, and he saw that no mannerism
of her gait had been changed. It was good to find her still Maisie, and, so to
speak, his next-door neighbour. No greeting passed between them, because there
had been none in the old days.

"What are you doing out of your studio at this hour?" said Dick, as one who was
entitled to ask.

"Idling. Just idling. I got angry with a chin and scraped it out. Then I left
it in a little heap of paint-chips and came away."

"I know what palette-knifing means. What was the piccy?"

"A fancy head that wouldn't come right,--horrid thing!"

"I don't like working over scraped paint when I'm doing flesh. The grain comes
up woolly as the paint dries."

"Not if you scrape properly." Maisie waved her hand to illustrate her methods.
There was a dab of paint on the white cuff. Dick laughed.

"You're as untidy as ever."

"That comes well from you. Look at your own cuff."

"By Jove, yes! It's worse than yours. I don't think we've much altered in
anything. Let's see, though." He looked at Maisie critically. The pale blue
haze of an autumn day crept between the tree-trunks of the Park and made a
background for the gray dress, the black velvet toque above the black hair, and
the resolute profile.

"No, there's nothing changed. How good it is! D'you remember when I fastened
your hair into the snap of a hand-bag?"

Maisie nodded, with a twinkle in her eyes, and turned her full face to Dick.

"Wait a minute," said he. "That mouth is down at the corners a little. Who's
been worrying you, Maisie?"

"No one but myself. I never seem to get on with my work, and yet I try hard
enough, and Kami says----"

"'Continuez, mesdemoiselles. Continuez toujours, mes enfants.' Kami is
depressing. I beg your pardon."

"Yes, that's what he says. He told me last summer that I was doing better and
he'd let me exhibit this year."

"Not in this place, surely?"

"Of course not. The Salon."

"You fly high."

"I've been beating my wings long enough. Where do you exhibit, Dick?"

"I don't exhibit. I sell."
                         
"What is your line, then?"

"Haven't you heard?" Dick's eyes opened. Was this thing possible? He cast about
for some means of conviction. They were not far from the Marble Arch. "Come up
Oxford Street a little and I'll show you."

A small knot of people stood round a print-shop that Dick knew well.

"Some reproduction of my work inside," he said, with suppressed triumph. Never
before had success tasted so sweet upon the tongue. "You see the sort of things
I paint. D'you like it?"

Maisie looked at the wild whirling rush of a field-battery going into action
under fire. Two artillery-men stood behind her in the crowd.

"They've chucked the off lead-'orse" said one to the other. "'E's tore up
awful, but they're makin' good time with the others. That lead-driver drives
better nor you, Tom. See 'ow cunnin' 'e's nursin' 'is 'orse."

"Number Three'll be off the limber, next jolt," was the answer.

"No, 'e won"t. See 'ow 'is foot's braced against the iron? 'E's all right."

Dick watched Maisie's face and swelled with joy--fine, rank, vulgar triumph.
She was more interested in the little crowd than in the picture.
                                                  
That was something that she could understand.

"And I wanted it so! Oh, I did want it so!" she said at last, under her breath.

"Me,--all me!" said Dick, placidly. "Look at their faces. It hits 'em. They
don't know what makes their eyes and mouths open; but I know. And I know my
work's right."

"Yes. I see. Oh, what a thing to have come to one!"

"Come to one, indeed! I had to go out and look for it. What do you think?"

"I call it success. Tell me how you got it."

They returned to the Park, and Dick delivered himself of the saga of his own
doings, with all the arrogance of a young man speaking to a woman.

From the beginning he told the tale, the I--I--I's flashing through the records
as telegraph-poles fly past the traveller. Maisie listened and nodded her head.
The histories of strife and privation did not move her a hair's-breadth. At the
end of each canto he would conclude, "And that gave me some notion of handling
colour," or light, or whatever it might be that he had set out to pursue and
understand. He led her breathless across half the world, speaking as he had
never spoken in his life before.

And in the flood-tide of his exaltation there came upon him a great desire to
pick up this maiden who nodded her head and said, "I understand. Go on,"--to
pick her up and carry her away with him, because she was Maisie, and because
she understood, and because she was his right, and a woman to be desired above
all women.

Then he checked himself abruptly. "And so I took all I wanted," he said, "and I
had to fight for it. Now you tell."

Maisie's tale was almost as gray as her dress. It covered years of patient toil
backed by savage pride that would not be broken though dealers laughed, and
fogs delayed work, and Kami was unkind and even sarcastic, and girls in other
studios were painfully polite. It had a few bright spots, in pictures accepted
at provincial exhibitions, but it wound up with the oft repeated wail, "And so
you see, Dick, I had no success, though I worked so hard."

Then pity filled Dick. Even thus had Maisie spoken when she could not hit the
breakwater, half an hour before she had kissed him. And that had happened
yesterday.

"Never mind," he said. "I'll tell you something, if you'll believe it." The
words were shaping themselves of their own accord. "The whole thing, lock,
stock, and barrel, isn't worth one big yellow sea-poppy below Fort Keeling."
                    
Maisie flushed a little. "It's all very well for you to talk, but you've had
the success and I haven't."

"Let me talk, then. I know you'll understand. Maisie, dear, it sounds a bit
absurd, but those ten years never existed, and I've come back again. It really
is just the same. Can't you see? You're alone now and I'm alone. What's the use
of worrying? Come to me instead, darling."

Maisie poked the gravel with her parasol. They were sitting on a bench.

"I understand," she said slowly. "But I've got my work to do, and I must do
it."

"Do it with me, then, dear. I won't interrupt."

"No, I couldn't. It's my work,--mine,--mine,--mine! I've been alone all my life
in myself, and I'm not going to belong to anybody except myself. I remember
things as well as you do, but that doesn't count. We were babies then, and we
didn't know what was before us. Dick, don't be selfish. I think I see my way to
a little success next year. Don't take it away from me."

"I beg your pardon, darling. It's my fault for speaking stupidly. I can't
expect you to throw up all your life just because I'm back. I'll go to my own
place and wait a little."

"But, Dick, I don't want you to--go--out of--my life, now you've just come
back."

"I'm at your orders; forgive me." Dick devoured the troubled little face with
his eyes. There was triumph in them, because he could not conceive that Maisie
should refuse sooner or later to love him, since he loved her.

"It's wrong of me," said Maisie, more slowly than before; "it's wrong and
selfish; but, oh, I've been so lonely! No, you misunderstand. Now I've seen you
again,--it's absurd, but I want to keep you in my life."

"Naturally. We belong."

"We don't; but you always understood me, and there is so much in my work that
you could help me in. You know things and the ways of doing things. You must."

"I do, I fancy, or else I don't know myself. Then you won't care to lose sight
of me altogether, and--you want me to help you in your work?"

"Yes; but remember, Dick, nothing will ever come of it. That's why I feel so
selfish. Can't things stay as they are? I do want your help."

"You shall have it. But let's consider. I must see your pics first, and
overhaul your sketches, and find out about your tendencies. You should see what
the papers say about my tendencies! Then I'll give you good advice, and you
shall paint according. Isn't that it, Maisie?"

Again there was triumph in Dick's eye.

"It's too good of you,--much too good. Because you are consoling yourself with
what will never happen, and I know that, and yet I want to keep you. Don't
blame me later, please."

"I'm going into the matter with my eyes open. Moreover the Queen can do no
wrong. It isn't your selfishness that impresses me. It's your audacity in
proposing to make use of me."

"Pooh! You're only Dick,--and a print-shop."

"Very good: that's all I am. But, Maisie, you believe, don't you, that I love
you? I don't want you to have any false notions about brothers and sisters."

Maisie looked up for a moment and dropped her eyes.

"It's absurd, but--I believe. I wish I could send you away before you get angry
with me. But--but the girl that lives with me is red-haired, and an
impressionist, and all our notions clash."

"So do ours, I think. Never mind. Three months from today we shall be laughing
at this together."

Maisie shook her head mournfully. "I knew you wouldn't understand, and it will
only hurt you more when you find out. Look at my face, Dick, and tell me what
you see."

They stood up and faced each other for a moment. The fog was gathering, and it
stifled the roar of the traffic of London beyond the railings. Dick brought all
his painfully acquired knowledge of faces to bear on the eyes, mouth, and chin
underneath the black velvet toque.

"It's the same Maisie, and it's the same me," he said. "We've both nice little
wills of our own, and one or other of us has to be broken. Now about the
future. I must come and see your pictures some day,--I suppose when the red-
haired girl is on the premises."

"Sundays are my best times. You must come on Sundays. There are such heaps of
things I want to talk about and ask your advice about. Now I must get back to
work."

"Try to find out before next Sunday what I am," said Dick. "Don't take my word
for anything I've told you. Good-bye, darling, and bless you."

Maisie stole away like a little gray mouse. Dick watched her till she was out
of sight, but he did not hear her say to herself, very soberly, "I'm a wretch,-
-a horrid, selfish wretch. But it's Dick, and Dick will understand."

No one has yet explained what actually happens when an irresistible force meets
the immovable post, though many have thought deeply, even as Dick thought. He
tried to assure himself that Maisie would be led in a few weeks by his mere
presence and discourse to a better way of thinking. Then he remembered much too
distinctly her face and all that was written on it.

"If I know anything of heads," he said, "there's everything in that face but
love. I shall have to put that in myself; and that chin and mouth won't be won
for nothing. But she's right. She knows what she wants, and she's going to get
it. What insolence! Me! Of all the people in the wide world, to use me! But
then she's Maisie. There's no getting over that fact; and it's good to see her
again. This business must have been simmering at the back of my head for years.
. . . She'll use me as I used Binat at Port Said. She's quite right. It will
hurt a little. I shall have to see her every Sunday,--like a young man courting
a housemaid. She's sure to come around; and yet--that mouth isn't a yielding
mouth. I shall be wanting to kiss her all the time, and I shall have to look at
her pictures,--I don't even know what sort of work she does yet,--and I shall
have to talk about Art,--Woman's Art! Therefore, particularly and perpetually,
damn all varieties of Art. It did me a good turn once, and now it's in my way.
I'll go home and do some Art."

Half-way to the studio, Dick was smitten with a terrible thought. The figure of
a solitary woman in the fog suggested it.

"She's all alone in London, with a red-haired impressionist girl, who probably
has the digestion of an ostrich. Most red-haired people have. Maisie's a
bilious little body. They'll eat like lone women,--meals at all hours, and tea
with all meals. I remember how the students in Paris used to pig along. She may
fall ill at any minute, and I shan't be able to help. Whew! this is ten times
worse than owning a wife."

Torpenhow entered the studio at dusk, and looked at Dick with eyes full of the
austere love that springs up between men who have tugged at the same oar
together and are yoked by custom and use and the intimacies of toil. This is a
good love, and, since it allows, and even encourages, strife, recrimination,
and brutal sincerity, does not die, but grows, and is proof against any absence
and evil conduct.

Dick was silent after he handed Torpenhow the filled pipe of council. He
thought of Maisie and her possible needs. It was a new thing to think of
anybody but Torpenhow, who could think for himself. Here at last was an outlet
for that cash balance. He could adorn Maisie barbarically with jewelry,--a
thick gold necklace round that little neck, bracelets upon the rounded arms,
and rings of price upon her hands,--the cool, temperate, ringless hands that he
had taken between his own. It was an absurd thought, for Maisie would not even
allow him to put one ring on one finger, and she would laugh at golden
trappings. It would be better to sit with her quietly in the dusk, his arm
around her neck and her face on his shoulder, as befitted husband and wife.
Torpenhow's boots creaked that night, and his strong voice jarred. Dick's brows
contracted and he murmured an evil word because he had taken all his success as
a right and part payment for past discomfort, and now he was checked in his
stride by a woman who admitted all the success and did not instantly care for
him.

"I say, old man," said Torpenhow, who had made one or two vain attempts at
conversation, "I haven't put your back up by anything I've said lately, have
I?"

"You! No. How could you?"

"Liver out of order?"

"The truly healthy man doesn't know he has a liver. I'm only a bit worried
about things in general. I suppose it's my soul."

"The truly healthy man doesn't know he has a soul. What business have you with
luxuries of that kind?"

"It came of itself. Who's the man that says that we're all islands shouting
lies to each other across seas of misunderstanding?"

"He's right, whoever he is,--except about the misunderstanding. I don't think
we could misunderstand each other."

The blue smoke curled back from the ceiling in clouds. Then Torpenhow,
insinuatingly--"Dick, is it a woman?"

"Be hanged if it's anything remotely resembling a woman; and if you begin to
talk like that, I'll hire a red-brick studio with white paint trimmings, and
begonias and petunias and blue Hungarias to play among three-and-sixpenny pot-
palms, and I'll mount all my pics in aniline-dye plush plasters, and I'll
invite every woman who maunders over what her guide-books tell her is Art, and
you shall receive 'em, Torp,--in a snuff-brown velvet coat with yellow trousers
and an orange tie. You'll like that?"

"Too thin, Dick. A better man than you once denied with cursing and swearing.
You've overdone it, just as he did. It's no business of mine, of course, but
it's comforting to think that somewhere under the stars there's saving up for
you a tremendous thrashing. Whether it'll come from heaven or earth, I don't
know, but it's bound to come and break you up a little. You want hammering."

Dick shivered. "All right," said he. "When this island is disintegrated, it
will call for you."

"I shall come round the corner and help to disintegrate it some more. We're
talking nonsense. Come along to a theatre."

 CHAPTER VI

 "And you may lead a thousand men,
 Nor ever draw the rein,
 But ere ye lead the Faery Queen
 'Twill burst your heart in twain."

 He has slipped his foot from the stirrup-bar,
 The bridle from his hand,
 And he is bound by hand and foot
 To the Queen 'o Faery-land.
        ----Sir Hoggie and the Fairies.

Some weeks later, on a very foggy Sunday, Dick was returning across the Park to
his studio. "This," he said, "is evidently the thrashing that Torp meant. It
hurts more than I expected; but the Queen can do no wrong; and she certainly
has some notion of drawing."

He had just finished a Sunday visit to Maisie,--always under the green eyes of
the red-haired impressionist girl, whom he learned to hate at sight,--and was
tingling with a keen sense of shame. Sunday after Sunday, putting on his best
clothes, he had walked over to the untidy house north of the Park, first to see
Maisie's pictures, and then to criticise and advise upon them as he realised
that they were productions on which advice would not be wasted. Sunday after
Sunday, and his love grew with each visit, he had been compelled to cram his
heart back from between his lips when it prompted him to kiss Maisie several
times and very much indeed. Sunday after Sunday, the head above the heart had
warned him that Maisie was not yet attainable, and that it would be better to
talk as connectedly as possible upon the mysteries of the craft that was all in
all to her. Therefore it was his fate to endure weekly torture in the studio
built out over the clammy back garden of a frail stuffy little villa where
nothing was ever in its right place and nobody every called,--to endure and to
watch Maisie moving to and fro with the teacups. He abhorred tea, but, since it
gave him a little longer time in her presence, he drank it devoutly, and the
red-haired girl sat in an untidy heap and eyed him without speaking. She was
always watching him.

Once, and only once, when she had left the studio, Maisie showed him an album
that held a few poor cuttings from provincial papers,--the briefest of hurried
notes on some of her pictures sent to outlying exhibitions. Dick stooped and
kissed the paint-smudged thumb on the open page. "Oh, my love, my love," he
muttered, "do you value these things? Chuck 'em into the waste-paper basket!"

"Not till I get something better," said Maisie, shutting the book.

Then Dick, moved by no respect for his public and a very deep regard for the
maiden, did deliberately propose, in order to secure more of these coveted
cuttings, that he should paint a picture which Maisie should sign.

"That's childish," said Maisie, "and I didn't think it of you. It must be my
work. Mine,--mine,--mine!"

"Go and design decorative medallions for rich brewers" houses. You are
thoroughly good at that." Dick was sick and savage.

"Better things than medallions, Dick," was the answer, in tones that recalled a
gray-eyed atom's fearless speech to Mrs. Jennett. Dick would have abased
himself utterly, but that other girl trailed in.

Next Sunday he laid at Maisie's feet small gifts of pencils that could almost
draw of themselves and colours in whose permanence he believed, and he was
ostentatiously attentive to the work in hand. It demanded, among other things,
an exposition of the faith that was in him.

Torpenhow's hair would have stood on end had he heard the fluency with which
Dick preached his own gospel of Art.

A month before, Dick would have been equally astonished; but it was Maisie's
will and pleasure, and he dragged his words together to make plain to her
comprehension all that had been hidden to himself of the whys and wherefores of
work. There is not the least difficulty in doing a thing if you only know how
to do it; the trouble is to explain your method.

"I could put this right if I had a brush in my hand," said Dick, despairingly,
over the modelling of a chin that Maisie complained would not "look flesh,"--it
was the same chin that she had scraped out with the palette knife,--"but I find
it almost impossible to teach you. There's a queer grim Dutch touch about your
painting that I like; but I've a notion that you're weak in drawing. You
foreshorten as though you never used the model, and you've caught Kami's pasty
way of dealing with flesh in shadow. Then, again, though you don't know it
yourself, you shirk hard work. Suppose you spend some of your time on line
lone. Line doesn't allow of shirking. Oils do, and three square inches of
flashy, tricky stuff in the corner of a pic sometimes carry a bad thing off,--
as I know. That's immoral. Do line-work for a little while, and then I can tell
more about your powers, as old Kami used to say."

Maisie protested; she did not care for the pure line.


"I know," said Dick. "You want to do your fancy heads with a bunch of flowers
at the base of the neck to hide bad modelling." The red-haired girl laughed a
little. "You want to do landscapes with cattle knee-deep in grass to hide bad
drawing. You want to do a great deal more than you can do. You have sense of
colour, but you want form. Colour's a gift,--put it aside and think no more
about it,--but form you can be drilled into. Now, all your fancy heads--and
some of them are very good--will keep you exactly where you are. With line you
must go forward or backward, and it will show up all your weaknesses."

"But other people----" began Maisie.

"You mustn't mind what other people do. If their souls were your soul, it would
be different. You stand and fall by your own work, remember, and it's waste of
time to think of any one else in this battle."

Dick paused, and the longing that had been so resolutely put away came back
into his eyes. He looked at Maisie, and the look asked as plainly as words, Was
it not time to leave all this barren wilderness of canvas and counsel and join
hands with Life and Love? Maisie assented to the new programme of schooling so
adorably that Dick could hardly restrain himself from picking her up then and
there and carrying her off to the nearest registrar's office. It was the
implicit obedience to the spoken word and the blank indifference to the
unspoken desire that baffled and buffeted his soul. He held authority in that
house,--authority limited, indeed, to one-half of one afternoon in seven, but
very real while it lasted. Maisie had learned to appeal to him on many
subjects, from the proper packing of pictures to the condition of a smoky
chimney. The red-haired girl never consulted him about anything.

On the other hand, she accepted his appearances without protest, and watched
him always. He discovered that the meals of the establishment were irregular
and fragmentary. They depended chiefly on tea, pickles, and biscuit, as he had
suspected from the beginning. The girls were supposed to market week and week
about, but they lived, with the help of a charwoman, as casually as the young
ravens. Maisie spent most of her income on models, and the other girl revelled
in apparatus as refined as her work was rough. Armed with knowledge, dear-
bought from the Docks, Dick warned Maisie that the end of semi-starvation meant
the crippling of power to work, which was considerably worse than death.

Maisie took the warning, and gave more thought to what she ate and drank. When
his trouble returned upon him, as it generally did in the long winter
twilights, the remembrance of that little act of domestic authority and his
coercion with a hearth-brush of the smoky drawing-room chimney stung Dick like
a whip-lash.

He conceived that this memory would be the extreme of his sufferings, till one
Sunday, the red-haired girl announced that she would make a study of Dick's
head, and that he would be good enough to sit still, and--quite as an
afterthought--look at Maisie. He sat, because he could not well refuse, and for
the space of half an hour he reflected on all the people in the past whom he
had laid open for the purposes of his own craft. He remembered Binat most
distinctly,--that Binat who had once been an artist and talked about
degradation.

It was the merest monochrome roughing in of a head, but it presented the dumb
waiting, the longing, and, above all, the hopeless enslavement of the man, in a
spirit of bitter mockery.

"I'll buy it," said Dick, promptly, "at your own price."

"My price is too high, but I dare say you'll be as grateful if----" The wet
sketch, fluttered from the girl's hand and fell into the ashes of the studio
stove. When she picked it up it was hopelessly smudged.

"Oh, it's all spoiled!" said Maisie. "And I never saw it. Was it like?"

"Thank you," said Dick under his breath to the red-haired girl, and he removed
himself swiftly.

"How that man hates me!" said the girl. "And how he loves you, Maisie!"

"What nonsense? I knew Dick's very fond of me, but he had his work to do, and I
have mine."

"Yes, he is fond of you, and I think he knows there is something in
impressionism, after all. Maisie, can't you see?"

"See? See what?"

"Nothing; only, I know that if I could get any man to look at me as that man
looks at you, I'd--I don't know what I'd do. But he hates me. Oh, how he hates
me!"

She was not altogether correct. Dick's hatred was tempered with gratitude for a
few moments, and then he forgot the girl entirely. Only the sense of shame
remained, and he was nursing it across the Park in the fog. "There'll be an
explosion one of these days," he said wrathfully. "But it isn't Maisie's fault;
she's right, quite right, as far as she knows, and I can't blame her. This
business has been going on for three months nearly. Three months!--and it cost
me ten years" knocking about to get at the notion, the merest raw notion, of my
work. That's true; but then I didn't have pins, drawing-pins, and palette-
knives, stuck into me every Sunday.

"Oh, my little darling, if ever I break you, somebody will have a very bad time
of it. No, she won't. I"d be as big a fool about her as I am now. I'll poison
that red-haired girl on my wedding-day,--she's unwholesome,--and now I'll pass
on these present bad times to Torp."

Torpenhow had been moved to lecture Dick more than once lately on the sin of
levity, and Dick and listened and replied not a word. In the weeks between the
first few Sundays of his discipline he had flung himself savagely into his
work, resolved that Maisie should at least know the full stretch of his powers.
Then he had taught Maisie that she must not pay the least attention to any work
outside her own, and Maisie had obeyed him all too well. She took his counsels,
but was not interested in his pictures.

"Your things smell of tobacco and blood," she said once. "Can't you do anything
except soldiers?"

"I could do a head of you that would startle you," thought Dick,--this was
before the red-haired girl had brought him under the guillotine,--but he only
said, "I am very sorry," and harrowed Torpenhow's soul that evening with
blasphemies against Art. Later, insensibly and to a large extent against his
own will, he ceased to interest himself in his own work.

For Maisie's sake, and to soothe the self-respect that it seemed to him he lost
each Sunday, he would not consciously turn out bad stuff, but, since Maisie did
not care even for his best, it were better not to do anything at all save wait
and mark time between Sunday and Sunday. Torpenhow was disgusted as the weeks
went by fruitless, and then attacked him one Sunday evening when Dick felt
utterly exhausted after three hours' biting self-restraint in Maisie's
presence. There was Language, and Torpenhow withdrew to consult the Nilghai,
who had come it to talk continental politics.

"Bone-idle, is he? Careless, and touched in the temper?" said the Nilghai. "It
isn't worth worrying over. Dick is probably playing the fool with a woman."

"Isn't that bad enough?"

"No. She may throw him out of gear and knock his work to pieces for a while.
She may even turn up here some day and make a scene on the staircase: one never
knows. But until Dick speaks of his own accord you had better not touch him. He
is no easy-tempered man to handle."

"No; I wish he were. He is such an aggressive, cocksure, you-be-damned fellow."

"He'll get that knocked out of him in time. He must learn that he can't storm
up and down the world with a box of moist tubes and a slick brush.

You're fond of him?"

"I'd take any punishment that's in store for him if I could; but the worst of
it is, no man can save his brother."

"No, and the worser of it is, there is no discharge in this war. Dick must
learn his lesson like the rest of us. Talking of war, there'll be trouble in
the Balkans in the spring."

"That trouble is long coming. I wonder if we could drag Dick out there when it
comes off?"

Dick entered the room soon afterwards, and the question was put to him.

"Not good enough," he said shortly. "I'm too comf'y where I am."

"Surely you aren't taking all the stuff in the papers seriously?" said the
Nilghai. "Your vogue will be ended in less than six months,--the public will
know your touch and go on to something new,--and where will you be then?"

"Here, in England."

"When you might be doing decent work among us out there? Nonsense! I shall go,
the Keneu will be there, Torp will be there, Cassavetti will be there, and the
whole lot of us will be there, and we shall have as much as ever we can do,
with unlimited fighting and the chance for you of seeing things that would make
the reputation of three Verestchagins."

"Um!" said Dick, pulling at his pipe.

"You prefer to stay here and imagine that all the world is gaping at your
pictures? Just think how full an average man's life is of his own pursuits and
pleasures. When twenty thousand of him find time to look up between mouthfuls
and grunt something about something they aren't the least interested in, the
net result is called fame, reputation, or notoriety, according to the taste and
fancy of the speller my lord."

"I know that as well as you do. Give me credit for a little gumption."

"Be hanged if I do!"

"Be hanged, then; you probably will be,--for a spy, by excited Turks. Heigh-ho!
I'm weary, dead weary, and virtue has gone out of me." Dick dropped into a
chair, and was fast asleep in a minute.

"That's a bad sign," said the Nilghai, in an undertone.

Torpenhow picked the pipe from the waistcoat where it was beginning to burn,
and put a pillow behind the head. "We can't help; we can't help," he said.
"It's a good ugly sort of old cocoanut, and I'm fond of it. There's the scar of
the wipe he got when he was cut over in the square."

"Shouldn't wonder if that has made him a trifle mad."

"I should. He's a most businesslike madman."

Then Dick began to snore furiously.

"Oh, here, no affection can stand this sort of thing. Wake up, Dick, and go and
sleep somewhere else, if you intend to make a noise about it."

"When a cat has been out on the tiles all night," said the Nilghai, in his
beard, "I notice that she usually sleeps all day. This is natural history."

Dick staggered away rubbing his eyes and yawning. In the night-watches he was
overtaken with an idea, so simple and so luminous that he wondered he had never
conceived it before. It was full of craft. He would seek Maisie on a week-day,-
-would suggest an excursion, and would take her by train to Fort Keeling, over
the very ground that they two had trodden together ten years ago.

"As a general rule," he explained to his chin-lathered reflection in the
morning, "it isn't safe to cross an old trail twice. Things remind one of
things, and a cold wind gets up, and you feel sad; but this is an exception to
every rule that ever was. I'll go to Maisie at once."

Fortunately, the red-haired girl was out shopping when he arrived, and Maisie
in a paint-spattered blouse was warring with her canvas. She was not pleased to
see him; for week-day visits were a stretch of the bond; and it needed all his
courage to explain his errand.

"I know you've been working too hard," he concluded, with an air of authority.
"If you do that, you'll break down. You had much better come."

"Where?" said Maisie, wearily. She had been standing before her easel too long,
and was very tired.

"Anywhere you please. We'll take a train tomorrow and see where it stops. We'll
have lunch somewhere, and I'll bring you back in the evening."

"If there's a good working light tomorrow, I lose a day." Maisie balanced the
heavy white chestnut palette irresolutely.

Dick bit back an oath that was hurrying to his lips. He had not yet learned
patience with the maiden to whom her work was all in all.

"You'll lose ever so many more, dear, if you use every hour of working light.
Overwork's only murderous idleness. Don't be unreasonable. I'll
call for you tomorrow after breakfast early."

"But surely you are going to ask----"

"No, I am not. I want you and nobody else. Besides, she hates me as much as I
hate her. She won't care to come. Tomorrow, then; and pray that we get
sunshine."

Dick went away delighted, and by consequence did no work whatever.

He strangled a wild desire to order a special train, but bought a great gray
kangaroo cloak lined with glossy black marten, and then retired into himself to
consider things.

"I'm going out for the day tomorrow with Dick," said Maisie to the red-haired
girl when the latter returned, tired, from marketing in the Edgware road.

"He deserves it. I shall have the studio floor thoroughly scrubbed while you're
away. It's very dirty."

Maisie had enjoyed no sort of holiday for months and looked forward to the
little excitement, but not without misgivings.

"There's nobody nicer than Dick when he talks sensibly, she thought, "but I'm
sure he'll be silly and worry me, and I'm sure I can't tell him anything he'd
like to hear. If he'd only be sensible, I should like him so much better."

Dick's eyes were full of joy when he made his appearance next morning and saw
Maisie, gray-ulstered and black-velvet-hatted, standing in the hallway. Palaces
of marble, and not sordid imitation of grained wood, were surely the fittest
background for such a divinity. The red-haired girl drew her into the studio
for a moment and kissed her hurriedly.

Maisie's eyebrows climbed to the top of her forehead; she was altogether unused
to these demonstrations. "Mind my hat," she said, hurrying away, and ran down
the steps to Dick waiting by the hansom.

"Are you quite warm enough! Are you sure you wouldn't like some more breakfast?
Put the cloak over your knees."

"I'm quite comf'y, thanks. Where are we going, Dick? Oh, do stop singing like
that. People will think we're mad."

"Let 'em think,--if the exertion doesn't kill them. They don't know who we are,
and I'm sure I don't care who they are. My faith, Maisie, you're looking
lovely!"

Maisie stared directly in front of her and did not reply. The wind of a keen
clear winter morning had put colour into her cheeks. Overhead, the creamy-
yellow smoke-clouds were thinning away one by one against a pale-blue sky, and
the improvident sparrows broke off from water-spout committees and cab-rank
cabals to clamour of the coming of spring.

"It will be lovely weather in the country," said Dick.

"But where are we going?"

"Wait and see."

The stopped at Victoria, and Dick sought tickets. For less than half the
fraction of an instant it occurred to Maisie, comfortably settled by the
waiting-room fire, that it was much more pleasant to send a man to the booking-
office than to elbow one's own way through the crowd.  Dick put her into a
Pullman,--solely on account of the warmth there; and she regarded the
extravagance with grave scandalised eyes as the train moved out into the
country.

"I wish I knew where we are going," she repeated for the twentieth time.

The name of a well-remembered station flashed by, towards the end of the run,
and Maisie was delighted.

"Oh, Dick, you villain!"

"Well, I thought you might like to see the place again. You haven't been here
since the old times, have you?"

"No. I never cared to see Mrs. Jennett again; and she was all that was ever
there."

"Not quite. Look out a minute. There's the windmill above the potato-fields;
they haven't built villas there yet; d'you remember when I shut you up in it?"

"Yes. How she beat you for it! I never told it was you."

"She guessed. I jammed a stick under the door and told you that I was burying
Amomma alive in the potatoes, and you believed me. You had a trusting nature in
those days."

They laughed and leaned to look out, identifying ancient landmarks with many
reminiscences. Dick fixed his weather eye on the curve of Maisie's cheek, very
near his own, and watched the blood rise under the clear skin. He congratulated
himself upon his cunning, and looked that the evening would bring him a great
reward.

When the train stopped they went out to look at an old town with new eyes.
First, but from a distance, they regarded the house of Mrs. Jennett.

"Suppose she should come out now, what would you do?" said Dick, with mock
terror.

"I should make a face."

"Show, then," said Dick, dropping into the speech of childhood.

Maisie made that face in the direction of the mean little villa, and Dick
laughed.

"'This is disgraceful,'" said Maisie, mimicking Mrs. Jennett's tone. "'Maisie,
you run in at once, and learn the collect, gospel, and epistle for the next
three Sundays. After all I've taught you, too, and three helps every Sunday at
dinner! Dick's always leading you into mischief. If you aren't a gentleman,
Dick, you might at least '"

The sentence ended abruptly. Maisie remembered when it had last been used.

"'Try to behave like one,'" said Dick, promptly. "Quite right. Now we'll get
some lunch and go on to Fort Keeling,--unless you'd rather drive there?"

"We must walk, out of respect to the place. How little changed it all is!"

They turned in the direction of the sea through unaltered streets, and the
influence of old things lay upon them. Presently they passed a confectioner's
shop much considered in the days when their joint pocket-money amounted to a
shilling a week.

"Dick, have you any pennies?" said Maisie, half to herself.

"Only three; and if you think you're going to have two of 'em to buy
peppermints with, you're wrong. She says peppermints aren't ladylike."

Again they laughed, and again the colour came into Maisie's cheeks as the blood
boiled through Dick's heart. After a large lunch they went down to the beach
and to Fort Keeling across the waste, wind-bitten land that no builder had
thought it worth his while to defile. The winter breeze came in from the sea
and sang about their ears.

"Maisie," said Dick, "your nose is getting a crude Prussian blue at the tip.
I'll race you as far as you please for as much as you please."

She looked round cautiously, and with a laugh set off, swiftly as the ulster
allowed, till she was out of breath.

"We used to run miles," she panted. "It's absurd that we can't run now."

"Old age, dear. This it is to get fat and sleek in town. When I wished to pull
your hair you generally ran for three miles, shrieking at the top of your
voice. I ought to know, because those shrieks of yours were meant to call up
Mrs. Jennett with a cane and----"

"Dick, I never got you a beating on purpose in my life."

"No, of course you never did. Good heavens! look at the sea."

"Why, it's the same as ever!" said Maisie.

Torpenhow had gathered from Mr. Beeton that Dick, properly dressed and shaved,
had left the house at half-past eight in the morning with a travelling-rug over
his arm. The Nilghai rolled in at mid-day for chess and polite conversation.

"It's worse than anything I imagined," said Torpenhow.

"Oh, the everlasting Dick, I suppose! You fuss over him like a hen with one
chick. Let him run riot if he thinks it'll amuse him. You can  whip a young pup
off feather, but you can't whip a young man."

"It isn't a woman. It's one woman; and it's a girl."

"Where's your proof?"

"He got up and went out at eight this morning,--got up in the middle of the
night, by Jove! a thing he never does except when he's on service. Even then,
remember, we had to kick him out of his blankets before the fight began at El-
Maghrib. It's disgusting."

"It looks odd; but maybe he's decided to buy a horse at last. He might get up
for that, mightn't he?"

"Buy a blazing wheelbarrow! He'd have told us if there was a horse in the wind.
It's a girl."

"Don't be certain. Perhaps it's only a married woman."

"Dick has some sense of humour, if you haven't. Who gets up in the gray dawn to
call on another man's wife? It's a girl."

"Let it be a girl, then. She may teach him that there's somebody else in the
world besides himself."

"She'll spoil his hand. She'll waste his time, and she'll marry him, and ruin
his work for ever. He'll be a respectable married man before we can stop him,
and--he'll ever go on the long trail again."

"All quite possible, but the earth won't spin the other way when that happens.
. . . No! ho! I"d give something to see Dick 'go wooing with the boys.' Don't
worry about it. These things be with Allah, and we can only look on. Get the
chessmen."

The red-haired girl was lying down in her own room, staring at the ceiling. The
footsteps of people on the pavement sounded, as they grew indistinct in the
distance, like a many-times-repeated kiss that was all one long kiss. Her hands
were by her side, and they opened and shut savagely from time to time.

The charwoman in charge of the scrubbing of the studio knocked at her door:
"Beg y' pardon, miss, but in cleanin' of a floor there's two, not to say three,
kind of soap, which is yaller, an' mottled, an' disinfectink. Now, jist before
I took my pail into the passage I though it would be pre'aps jest as well if I
was to come up 'ere an' ask you what sort of soap you was wishful that I should
use on them boards. The yaller soap, miss----"

There was nothing in the speech to have caused the paroxysm of fury that drove
the red-haired girl into the middle of the room, almost shouting--"Do you
suppose I care what you use? Any kind will do!--any kind!"

The woman fled, and the red-haired girl looked at her own reflection in the
glass for an instant and covered her face with her hands. It was as though she
had shouted some shameless secret aloud.

CHAPTER VII

Roses red and roses white
Plucked I for my love's delight.

She would none of all my posies,--
Bade me gather her blue roses.

Half the world I wandered through,
Seeking where such flowers grew;
Half the world unto my quest
Answered but with laugh and jest.

It may be beyond the grave
She shall find what she would have.

Mine was but an idle quest,--
Roses white and red are best!
    ----Blue Roses

Indeed the sea had not changed. Its waters were low on the mud-banks, and the
Marazion Bell-buoy clanked and swung in the tide-way. On the white beach-sand
dried stumps of sea-poppy shivered and chattered.

"I don't see the old breakwater," said Maisie, under her breath.

"Let's be thankful that we have as much as we have. I don't believe they've
mounted a single new gun on the fort since we were here. Come and look."

They came to the glacis of Fort Keeling, and sat down in a nook sheltered from
the wind under the tarred throat of a forty-pounder cannon.

"Now, if Ammoma were only here!" said Maisie.

For a long time both were silent. Then Dick took Maisie's hand and called her
by her name.

She shook her head and looked out to sea.

"Maisie, darling, doesn't it make any difference?"

"No!" between clenched teeth. "I'd--I'd tell you if it did; but it doesn't. Oh,
Dick, please be sensible."

"Don't you think that it ever will?"

"No, I'm sure it won't."

"Why?"

Maisie rested her chin on her hand, and, still regarding the sea, spoke
hurriedly--"I know what you want perfectly well, but I can't give it to you,
Dick. It isn't my fault; indeed, it isn't. If I felt that I could care for any
one----But I don't feel that I care. I simply don't understand what the feeling
means."

"Is that true, dear?"

"You've been very good to me, Dickie; and the only way I can pay you back is by
speaking the truth. I daren't tell a fib. I despise myself quite enough as it
is."

"What in the world for?"

"Because--because I take everything that you give me and I give you nothing in
return. It's mean and selfish of me, and whenever I think of it it worries me."

"Understand once for all, then, that I can manage my own affairs, and if I
choose to do anything you aren't to blame. You haven't a single thing to
reproach yourself with, darling."

"Yes, I have, and talking only makes it worse."

"Then don't talk about it."

"How can I help myself? If you find me alone for a minute you are always
talking about it; and when you aren't you look it. You don't know how I despise
myself sometimes."

"Great goodness!" said Dick, nearly jumping to his feet. "Speak the truth now,
Maisie, if you never speak it again! Do I--does this worrying bore you?"

"No. It does not."

"You"d tell me if it did?"

"I should let you know, I think."

"Thank you. The other thing is fatal. But you must learn to forgive a man when
he's in love. He's always a nuisance. You must have known that?"

Maisie did not consider the last question worth answering, and Dick was forced
to repeat it.

"There were other men, of course. They always worried just when I was in the
middle of my work, and wanted me to listen to them."

"Did you listen?"

"At first; and they couldn't understand why I didn't care. And they used to
praise my pictures; and I thought they meant it. I used to be proud of the
praise, and tell Kami, and--I shall never forget--once Kami laughed at me."

"You don't like being laughed at, Maisie, do you?"

"I hate it. I never laugh at other people unless--unless they do bad work.
Dick, tell me honestly what you think of my pictures generally,--of everything
of mine that you've seen."

"'Honest, honest, and honest over!'" quoted Dick from a catchword of long ago.
"Tell me what Kami always says."

Maisie hesitated. "He--he says that there is feeling in them."

"How dare you tell me a fib like that? Remember, I was under Kami for two
years. I know exactly what he says."

"It isn't a fib."

"It's worse; it's a half-truth. Kami says, when he puts his head on one side,--
so, 'Il y a du sentiment, mais il n'y a pas de parti pris.'" He rolled
the r threateningly, as Kami used to do.

"Yes, that is what he says; and I'm beginning to think that he is right."

"Certainly he is." Dick admitted that two people in the world could do and say
no wrong. Kami was the man.

"And now you say the same thing. It's so disheartening."

"I'm sorry, but you asked me to speak the truth. Besides, I love you too much
to pretend about your work. It's strong, it's patient sometimes,--not always,--
and sometimes there's power in it, but there's no special reason why it should
be done at all. At least, that's how it strikes me."

"There's no special reason why anything in the world should ever be done. You
know that as well as I do. I only want success."

"You're going the wrong way to get it, then. Hasn't Kami ever told you so?"

"Don't quote Kami to me. I want to know what you think. My work's bad, to begin
with."

"I didn't say that, and I don't think it."

"It's amateurish, then."

"That it most certainly is not. You're a work-woman, darling, to your boot-
heels, and I respect you for that."

"You don't laugh at me behind my back?"

"No, dear. You see, you are more to me than any one else. Put this cloak thing
round you, or you'll get chilled."

Maisie wrapped herself in the soft marten skins, turning the gray kangaroo fur
to the outside. "This is delicious," she said, rubbing her chin thoughtfully
along the fur.

"Well? Why am I wrong in trying to get a little success?"

"Just because you try. Don't you understand, darling? Good work has nothing to
do with--doesn't belong to--the person who does it. It's put into him or her
from outside."

"But how does that affect----"

"Wait a minute. All we can do is to learn how to do our work, to be masters of
our materials instead of servants, and never to be afraid of anything."

"I understand that."

"Everything else comes from outside ourselves. Very good. If we sit down
quietly to work out notions that are sent to us, we may or we may not do
something that isn't bad. A great deal depends on being master of the bricks
and mortar of the trade. But the instant we begin to think about success and
the effect of our work--to play with one eye on the gallery--we lose power and
touch and everything else. At least that's how I have found it. Instead of
being quiet and giving every power you possess to your work, you're fretting
over something which you can neither help no hinder by a minute. See?"

"It's so easy for you to talk in that way. People like what you do. Don't you
ever think about the gallery?"

"Much too often; but I'm always punished for it by loss of power. It's as
simple as the Rule of Three. If we make light of our work by using it for our
own ends, our work will make light of us, and, as we're the weaker, we shall
suffer."

"I don't treat my work lightly. You know that it's everything to me."

"Of course; but, whether you realise it or not, you give two strokes for
yourself to one for your work. It isn't your fault, darling. I do exactly the
same thing, and know that I'm doing it. Most of the French schools, and all the
schools here, drive the students to work for their own credit, and for the sake
of their pride. I was told that all the world was interested in my work, and
everybody at Kami's talked turpentine, and I honestly believed that the world
needed elevating and influencing, and all manner of impertinences, by my
brushes. By Jove, I actually believed that! When my little head was bursting
with a notion that I couldn't handle because I hadn't sufficient knowledge of
my craft, I used to run about wondering at my own magnificence and getting
ready to astonish the world."

"But surely one can do that sometimes?"

"Very seldom with malice aforethought, darling. And when it's done it's such a
tiny thing, and the world's so big, and all but a millionth part of it doesn't
care. Maisie, come with me and I'll show you something of the size of the
world. One can no more avoid working than eating,--that goes on by itself,--but
try to see what you are working for. I know such little heavens that I could
take you to,--islands tucked away under the Line. You sight them after weeks of
crashing through water as black as black marble because it's so deep, and you
sit in the fore-chains day after day and see the sun rise almost afraid because
the sea's so lonely."

"Who is afraid?--you, or the sun?"

"The sun, of course. And there are noises under the sea, and sounds overhead in
a clear sky. Then you find your island alive with hot moist orchids that make
mouths at you and can do everything except talk.

There's a waterfall in it three hundred feet high, just like a sliver of green
jade laced with silver; and millions of wild bees live up in the rocks; and you
can hear the fat cocoanuts falling from the palms; and you order an ivory-white
servant to sling you a long yellow hammock with tassels on it like ripe maize,
and you put up your feet and hear the bees hum and the water fall till you go
to sleep."

"Can one work there?"

"Certainly. One must do something always. You hang your canvas up in a palm
tree and let the parrots criticise. When the scuffle you heave a ripe custard-
apple at them, and it bursts in a lather of cream. There are hundreds of
places. Come and see them."

"I don't quite like that place. It sounds lazy. Tell me another."

"What do you think of a big, red, dead city built of red sandstone, with raw
green aloes growing between the stones, lying out neglected on honey-coloured
sands? There are forty dead kings there, Maisie, each in a gorgeous tomb finer
than all the others. You look at the palaces and streets and shops and tanks,
and think that men must live there, till you find a wee gray squirrel rubbing
its nose all alone in the market-place, and a jewelled peacock struts out of a
carved doorway and spreads its tail against a marble screen as fine pierced as
point-lace. Then a monkey--a little black monkey--walks through the main square
to get a drink from a tank forty feet deep. He slides down the creepers to the
water's edge, and a friend holds him by the tail, in case he should fall in."

"Is that all true?"

"I have been there and seen. Then evening comes, and the lights change till
it's just as though you stood in the heart of a king-opal. A little before
sundown, as punctually as clockwork, a big bristly wild boar, with all his
family following, trots through the city gate, churning the foam on his tusks.
You climb on the shoulder of a blind black stone god and watch that pig choose
himself a palace for the night and stump in wagging his tail. Then the night-
wind gets up, and the sands move, and you hear the desert outside the city
singing, 'Now I lay me down to sleep,' and everything is dark till the moon
rises. Maisie, darling, come with me and see what the world is really like.
It's very lovely, and it's very horrible,--but I won't let you see anything
horrid,--and it doesn't care your life or mine for pictures or anything else
except doing its own work and making love. Come, and I'll show you how to brew
sangaree, and sling a hammock, and--oh, thousands of things, and you'll see for
yourself what colour means, and we'll find out together what love means, and
then, maybe, we shall be allowed to do some good work. Come away!"

"Why?" said Maisie.

"How can you do anything until you have seen everything, or as much as you can?
And besides, darling, I love you. Come along with me. You have no business
here; you don't belong to this place; you're half a gipsy,--your face tells
that; and I--even the smell of open water makes me restless. Come across the
sea and be happy!"

He had risen to his feet, and stood in the shadow of the gun, looking down at
the girl. The very short winter afternoon had worn away, and, before they knew,
the winter moon was walking the untroubled sea. Long ruled lines of silver
showed where a ripple of the rising tide was turning over the mud-banks. The
wind had dropped, and in the intense stillness they could hear a donkey
cropping the frosty grass many yards away. A faint beating, like that of a
muffled drum, came out of the moon-haze.

"What's that?" said Maisie, quickly. "It sounds like a heart beating.
Where is it?"

Dick was so angry at this sudden wrench to his pleadings that he could not
trust himself to speak, and in this silence caught the sound. Maisie from her
seat under the gun watched him with a certain amount of fear.

She wished so much that he would be sensible and cease to worry her with over-
sea emotion that she both could and could not understand. She was not prepared,
however, for the change in his face as he listened.

"It's a steamer," he said,--"a twin-screw steamer, by the beat. I  can't make
her out, but she must be standing very close inshore. Ah!" as the red of a
rocket streaked the haze, "she's standing in to signal before she clears the
Channel."

"Is it a wreck?" said Maisie, to whom these words were as Greek.

Dick's eyes were turned to the sea. "Wreck! What nonsense! She"s only reporting
herself. Red rocket forward--there's a green light aft now, and two red rockets
from the bridge."

"What does that mean?"

"It's the signal of the Cross Keys Line running to Australia. I wonder which
steamer it is." The note of his voice had changed; he seemed to be talking to
himself, and Maisie did not approve of it. The moonlight broke the haze for a
moment, touching the black sides of a long steamer working down Channel. "Four
masts and three funnels--she's in deep draught, too. That must be the
Barralong, or the Bhutia. No, the Bhutia has a clipper bow. It's the Barralong,
to Australia. She'll lift the Southern Cross in a week,--lucky old tub!--oh,
lucky old tub!"

He stared intently, and moved up the slope of the fort to get a better view,
but the mist on the sea thickened again, and the beating of the screws grew
fainter. Maisie called to him a little angrily, and he returned, still keeping
his eyes to seaward. "Have you ever seen the Southern Cross blazing right over
your head?" he asked. "It"s superb!"

"No," she said shortly, "and I don't want to. If you think it's so lovely, why
don't you go and see it yourself?"

She raised her face from the soft blackness of the marten skins about her
throat, and her eyes shone like diamonds. The moonlight on the gray kangaroo
fur turned it to frosted silver of the coldest.

"By Jove, Maisie, you look like a little heathen idol tucked up there." The
eyes showed that they did not appreciate the compliment. "I'm sorry," he
continued. "The Southern Cross isn't worth looking at unless someone helps you
to see. That steamer's out of hearing."

"Dick," she said quietly, "suppose I were to come to you now,--be quiet a
minute,--just as I am, and caring for you just as much as I do."

"Not as a brother, though. You said you didn't--in the Park."

"I never had a brother. Suppose I said, 'Take me to those places, and in time,
perhaps, I might really care for you,' what would you do?"

"Send you straight back to where you came from, in a cab. No, I wouldn't; I"d
let you walk. But you couldn't do it, dear. And I wouldn't run the risk. You're
worth waiting for till you can come without reservation."

"Do you honestly believe that?"

"I have a hazy sort of idea that I do. Has it never struck you in that light?"

"Ye--es. I feel so wicked about it."

"Wickeder than usual?"

"You don't know all I think. It's almost too awful to tell."

"Never mind. You promised to tell me the truth--at least."

"It's so ungrateful of me, but--but, though I know you care for me, and I like
to have you with me, I'd--I"d even sacrifice you, if that would bring me what I
want."

"My poor little darling! I know that state of mind. It doesn't lead to good
work."

"You aren't angry? Remember, I do despise myself."

"I'm not exactly flattered,--I had guessed as much before,--but I'm not angry.
I'm sorry for you. Surely you ought to have left a littleness like that behind
you, years ago."

"You've no right to patronise me! I only want what I have worked for so long.
It came to you without any trouble, and--and I don't think it"s fair."

"What can I do? I"d give ten years of my life to get you what you want. But I
can't help you; even I can't help."

A murmur of dissent from Maisie. He went on--"And I know by what you have just
said that you're on the wrong road to success. It isn't got at by sacrificing
other people,--I've had that much knocked into me; you must sacrifice yourself,
and live under orders, and never think for yourself, and never have real
satisfaction in your work except just at the beginning, when you're reaching
out after a notion."

"How can you believe all that?"

"There's no question of belief or disbelief. That's the law, and you take it or
refuse it as you please. I try to obey, but I  can't, and then my work turns
bad on my hands. Under any circumstances, remember, four-fifths of everybody's
work must be bad. But the remnant is worth the trouble for its own sake."

"Isn't it nice to get credit even for bad work?"

"It's much too nice. But----May I tell you something? It isn't a pretty tale,
but you're so like a man that I forget when I'm talking to you."

"Tell me."

"Once when I was out in the Soudan I went over some ground that we had been
fighting on for three days. There were twelve hundred dead; and we hadn't time
to bury them."

"How ghastly!"

"I had been at work on a big double-sheet sketch, and I was wondering what
people would think of it at home. The sight of that field taught me a good
deal. It looked just like a bed of horrible toadstools in all colours, and--I'd
never seen men in bulk go back to their beginnings before. So I began to
understand that men and women were only material to work with, and that what
they said or did was of no consequence. See? Strictly speaking, you might just
as well put your ear down to the palette to catch what your colours are
saying."

"Dick, that's disgraceful!"

"Wait a minute. I said, strictly speaking. Unfortunately, everybody must be
either a man or a woman."

"I'm glad you allow that much."

"In your case I don't. You aren't a woman. But ordinary people, Maisie, must
behave and work as such. That's what makes me so savage." He hurled a pebble
towards the sea as he spoke. "I know that it is outside my business to care
what people say; I can see that it spoils my output if I listen to 'em; and
yet, confound it all,"--another pebble flew seaward,--"I can't help purring
when I'm rubbed the right way. Even when I can see on a man's forehead that he
is lying his way through a clump of pretty speeches, those lies make me happy
and play the mischief with my hand."

"And when he doesn't say pretty things?"

"Then, belovedest,"--Dick grinned,--"I forget that I am the steward of these
gifts, and I want to make that man love and appreciate my work with a thick
stick. It's too humiliating altogether; but I suppose even if one were an angel
and painted humans altogether from outside, one would lose in touch what one
gained in grip."

Maisie laughed at the idea of Dick as an angel.

"But you seem to think," she said, "that everything nice spoils your hand."

"I don't think. It's the law,--just the same as it was at Mrs. Jennett's.
Everything that is nice does spoil your hand. I'm glad you see so clearly."

"I don't like the view."

"Nor I. But--have got orders: what can do? Are you strong enough to face it
alone?"

"I suppose I must."

"Let me help, darling. We can hold each other very tight and try to walk
straight. We shall blunder horribly, but it will be better than stumbling
apart. Maisie, can't you see reason?"

"I don't think we should get on together. We should be two of a trade, so we
should never agree."

"How I should like to meet the man who made that proverb! He lived in a cave
and ate raw bear, I fancy. I'd make him chew his own arrow-heads. Well?"

"I should be only half married to you. I should worry and fuss about my work,
as I do now. Four days out of the seven I'm not fit to speak to."

"You talk as if no one else in the world had ever used a brush. D'you suppose
that I don't know the feeling of worry and bother and  can't-get-at-ness?
You're lucky if you only have it four days out of the seven. What difference
would that make?"

"A great deal--if you had it too."

"Yes, but I could respect it. Another man might not. He might laugh at you. But
there's no use talking about it. If you can think in that way you can't care
for me--yet."

The tide had nearly covered the mud-banks and twenty little ripples broke on
the beach before Maisie chose to speak.

"Dick," she said slowly, "I believe very much that you are better than I am."

"This doesn't seem to bear on the argument--but in what way?"

"I don't quite know, but in what you said about work and things; and then
you're so patient. Yes, you're better than I am."

Dick considered rapidly the murkiness of an average man's life. There was
nothing in the review to fill him with a sense of virtue. He lifted the hem of
the cloak to his lips.

"Why," said Maisie, making as though she had not noticed, "can you see things
that I can't? I don't believe what you believe; but you're right, I believe."

"If I've seen anything, God knows I couldn't have seen it but for you, and I
know that I couldn't have said it except to you. You seemed to make everything
clear for a minute; but I don't practice what I preach. You would help me. . .
There are only us two in the world for all purposes, and--and you like to have
me with you?"

"Of course I do. I wonder if you can realise how utterly lonely I am!"

"Darling, I think I can."

"Two years ago, when I first took the little house, I used to walk up and down
the back-garden trying to cry. I never can cry. Can you?"

"It's some time since I tried. What was the trouble? Overwork?"

"I don't know; but I used to dream that I had broken down, and had no money,
and was starving in London. I thought about it all day, and it frightened me--
oh, how it frightened me!"

"I know that fear. It's the most terrible of all. It wakes me up in the night
sometimes. You oughtn't to know anything about it."

"How do you know?"

"Never mind. Is your three hundred a year safe?"

"It's in Consols."

"Very well. If any one comes to you and recommends a better investment,--even
if I should come to you,--don't you listen. Never shift the money for a minute,
and never lend a penny of it,--even to the red-haired girl."

"Don't scold me so! I'm not likely to be foolish."

"The earth is full of men who'd sell their souls for three hundred a year; and
women come and talk, and borrow a five-pound note here and a ten-pound note
there; and a woman has no conscience in a money debt. Stick to your money,
Maisie, for there's nothing more ghastly in the world than poverty in London.
It's scared me. By Jove, it put the fear into me! And one oughtn't to be afraid
of anything."

To each man is appointed his particular dread,--the terror that, if he does not
fight against it, must cow him even to the loss of his manhood. Dick"s
experience of the sordid misery of want had entered into the deeps of him, and,
lest he might find virtue too easy, that memory stood behind him, tempting to
shame, when dealers came to buy his wares. As the Nilghai quaked against his
will at the still green water of a lake or a mill-dam, as Torpenhow flinched
before any white arm that could cut or stab and loathed himself for flinching,
Dick feared the poverty he had once tasted half in jest. His burden was heavier
than the burdens of his companions.

Maisie watched the face working in the moonlight.

"You've plenty of pennies now," she said soothingly.

"I shall never have enough," he began, with vicious emphasis. Then, laughing,
"I shall always be three-pence short in my accounts."

"Why threepence?"

"I carried a man's bag once from Liverpool Street Station to Blackfriar"s
Bridge. It was a sixpenny job,--you needn't laugh; indeed it was,--and I wanted
the money desperately. He only gave me threepence; and he hadn't even the
decency to pay in silver. Whatever money I make, I shall never get that odd
threepence out of the world."

This was not language befitting the man who had preached of the sanctity of
work. It jarred on Maisie, who preferred her payment in applause, which, since
all men desire it, must be of the right. She hunted for her little purse and
gravely took out a threepenny bit.

"There it is," she said. "I'll pay you, Dickie; and don't worry any more; it
isn't worth while. Are you paid?"

"I am," said the very human apostle of fair craft, taking the coin. "I'm paid a
thousand times, and we'll close that account. It shall live on my watch-chain;
and you're an angel, Maisie."

"I'm very cramped, and I'm feeling a little cold. Good gracious! the cloak is
all white, and so is your moustache! I never knew it was so chilly."

A light frost lay white on the shoulder of Dick's ulster. He, too, had
forgotten the state of the weather. They laughed together, and with that laugh
ended all serious discourse.

They ran inland across the waste to warm themselves, then turned to look at the
glory of the full tide under the moonlight and the intense black shadows of the
furze bushes. It was an additional joy to Dick that Maisie could see colour
even as he saw it,--could see the blue in the white of the mist, the violet
that is in gray palings, and all things else as they are,--not of one hue, but
a thousand. And the moonlight came into Maisie's soul, so that she, usually
reserved, chattered of herself and of the things she took interest in,--of
Kami, wisest of teachers, and of the girls in the studio,--of the Poles, who
will kill themselves with overwork if they are not checked; of the French, who
talk at great length of much more than they will ever accomplish; of the
slovenly English, who toil hopelessly and cannot understand that inclination
does not imply power; of the Americans, whose rasping voices in the hush of a
hot afternoon strain tense-drawn nerves to breaking-point, and whose suppers
lead to indigestion; of tempestuous Russians, neither to hold nor to bind, who
tell the girls ghost-stories till the girls shriek; of stolid Germans, who come
to learn one thing, and, having mastered that much, stolidly go away and copy
pictures for evermore. Dick listened enraptured because it was Maisie who
spoke. He knew the old life.

"It hasn't changed much," he said. "Do they still steal colours at lunch-time?"

"Not steal. Attract is the word. Of course they do. I'm good--I only attract
ultramarine; but there are students who'd attract flake-white."

"I've done it myself. You can't help it when the palettes are hung up.

Every colour is common property once it runs down,--even though you do start it
with a drop of oil. It teaches people not to waste their tubes."

"I should like to attract some of your colours, Dick. Perhaps I might catch
your success with them."

"I mustn't say a bad word, but I should like to. What in the world, which
you've just missed a lovely chance of seeing, does success or want of success,
or a three-storied success, matter compared with----No, I won't open that
question again. It's time to go back to town."

"I'm sorry, Dick, but----"

"You're much more interested in that than you are in me."

"I don't know, I don't think I am."

"What will you give me if I tell you a sure short-cut to everything you want,--
the trouble and the fuss and the tangle and all the rest? Will you promise to
obey me?"

"Of course."

"In the first place, you must never forget a meal because you happen to be at
work. You forgot your lunch twice last week," said Dick, at a venture, for he
knew with whom he was dealing.

"No, no,--only once, really."

"That's bad enough. And you mustn't take a cup of tea and a biscuit in place of
a regular dinner, because dinner happens to be a trouble."

"You're making fun of me!"

"I never was more in earnest in my life. Oh, my love, my love, hasn't it dawned
on you yet what you are to me? Here's the whole earth in a conspiracy to give
you a chill, or run over you, or drench you to the skin, or cheat you out of
your money, or let you die of overwork and underfeeding, and I haven't the mere
right to look after you. Why, I don't even know if you have sense enough to put
on warm things when the weather's cold."

"Dick, you're the most awful boy to talk to--really! How do you suppose I
managed when you were away?"

"I wasn't here, and I didn't know. But now I'm back I'd give everything I have
for the right of telling you to come in out of the rain."

"Your success too?"

This time it cost Dick a severe struggle to refrain from bad words.

"As Mrs. Jennett used to say, you're a trial, Maisie! You've been cooped up in
the schools too long, and you think every one is looking at you. There aren't
twelve hundred people in the world who understand pictures. The others pretend
and don't care. Remember, I've seen twelve hundred men dead in toadstool-beds.
It's only the voice of the tiniest little fraction of people that makes
success. The real world doesn't care a tinker's--doesn't care a bit. For aught
you or I know, every man in the world may be arguing with a Maisie of his own."

"Poor Maisie!"

"Poor Dick, I think. Do you believe while he's fighting for what"s dearer than
his life he wants to look at a picture? And even if he did, and if all the
world did, and a thousand million people rose up and shouted hymns to my honour
and glory, would that make up to me for the knowledge that you were out
shopping in the Edgware Road on a rainy day without an umbrella? Now we'll go
to the station."

"But you said on the beach----" persisted Maisie, with a certain fear.

Dick groaned aloud: "Yes, I know what I said. My work is everything I have, or
am, or hope to be, to me, and I believe I've learnt the law that governs it;
but I've some lingering sense of fun left,--though you've nearly knocked it out
of me. I can just see that it isn't everything to all the world. Do what I say,
and not what I do."

Maisie was careful not to reopen debatable matters, and they returned to London
joyously. The terminus stopped Dick in the midst of an eloquent harangue on the
beauties of exercise. He would buy Maisie a horse,--such a horse as never yet
bowed head to bit,--would stable it, with a companion, some twenty miles from
London, and Maisie, solely for her health's sake should ride with him twice or
thrice a week.

"That's absurd," said she. "It wouldn't be proper."

"Now, who in all London tonight would have sufficient interest or audacity to
call us two to account for anything we chose to do?"

Maisie looked at the lamps, the fog, and the hideous turmoil. Dick was right;
but horseflesh did not make for Art as she understood it.

"You're very nice sometimes, but you're very foolish more times. I'm not going
to let you give me horses, or take you out of your way tonight. I"ll go home by
myself. Only I want you to promise me something. You won't think any more about
that extra threepence, will you? Remember, you've been paid; and I won't allow
you to be spiteful and do bad work for a little thing like that. You can be so
big that you mustn't be tiny."

This was turning the tables with a vengeance. There remained only to put Maisie
into her hansom.

"Goodbye," she said simply. "You'll come on Sunday. It has been a beautiful
day, Dick. Why can't it be like this always?"

"Because love's like line-work: you must go forward or backward; you can't
stand still. By the way, go on with your line-work. Good night, and, for my--
for my sake, take care of yourself."

He turned to walk home, meditating. The day had brought him nothing that he
hoped for, but--surely this was worth many days--it had brought him nearer to
Maisie. The end was only a question of time now, and the prize well worth the
waiting. By instinct, once more, he turned to the river.

"And she understood at once," he said, looking at the water. "She found out my
pet besetting sin on the spot, and paid it off. My God, how she understood! And
she said I was better than she was! Better than she was!" He laughed at the
absurdity of the notion. "I wonder if girls guess at one-half a man's life.
They  can't, or--they wouldn't marry us." He took her gift out of his pocket,
and considered it in the light of a miracle and a pledge of the comprehension
that, one day, would lead to perfect happiness. Meantime, Maisie was alone in
London, with none to save her from danger. And the packed wilderness was very
full of danger.

Dick made his prayer to Fate disjointedly after the manner of the heathen as he
threw the piece of silver into the river. If any evil were to befal, let him
bear the burden and let Maisie go unscathed, since the threepenny piece was
dearest to him of all his possessions. It was a small coin in itself, but
Maisie had given it, and the Thames held it, and surely the Fates would be
bribed for this once.

The drowning of the coin seemed to cut him free from thought of Maisie for the
moment. He took himself off the bridge and went whistling to his chambers with
a strong yearning for some man-talk and tobacco after his first experience of
an entire day spent in the society of a woman. There was a stronger desire at
his heart when there rose before him an unsolicited vision of the Barralong
dipping deep and sailing free for the Southern Cross.

CHAPTER VIII

 And these two, as I have told you,
 Were the friends of Hiawatha,
 Chibiabos, the musician,
 And the very strong man, Kwasind.
          --Hiawatha

Torpenhow was paging the last sheets of some manuscript, while the Nilghai, who
had come for chess and remained to talk tactics, was reading through the first
part, commenting scornfully the while.

"It's picturesque enough and it's sketchy," said he; "but as a serious
consideration of affairs in Eastern Europe, it's not worth much."

"It's off my hands at any rate. . . . Thirty-seven, thirty-eight, thirty-nine
slips altogether, aren't there? That should make between eleven and twelve
pages of valuable misinformation. Heigh-ho!" Torpenhow shuffled the writing
together and hummed--

'Young lambs to sell, young lambs to sell,
 If I'd as much money as I could tell,
 I never would cry, Young lambs to sell!'"

Dick entered, self-conscious and a little defiant, but in the best of tempers
with all the world.

"Back at last?" said Torpenhow.

"More or less. What have you been doing?"

"Work. Dickie, you behave as though the Bank of England were behind you. Here's
Sunday, Monday, and Tuesday gone and you haven't done a line. It's scandalous."

"The notions come and go, my children--they come and go like our 'baccy," he
answered, filling his pipe. "Moreover," he stooped to thrust a spill into the
grate, "Apollo does not always stretch his----Oh, confound your clumsy jests,
Nilghai!"

"This is not the place to preach the theory of direct inspiration," said the
Nilghai, returning Torpenhow's large and workmanlike bellows to their nail on
the wall. "We believe in cobblers" wax. La!--where you sit down."

"If you weren't so big and fat," said Dick, looking round for a weapon, "I'd---
-"

"No skylarking in my rooms. You two smashed half my furniture last time you
threw the cushions about. You might have the decency to say How d'you do? to
Binkie. Look at him."

Binkie had jumped down from the sofa and was fawning round Dick's knee, and
scratching at his boots.

"Dear man!" said Dick, snatching him up, and kissing him on the black patch
above his right eye. "Did ums was, Binks? Did that ugly Nilghai turn you off
the sofa? Bite him, Mr. Binkie." He pitched him on the Nilghai's stomach, as
the big man lay at ease, and Binkie pretended to destroy the Nilghai inch by
inch, till a sofa cushion extinguished him, and panting he stuck out his tongue
at the company.

"The Binkie-boy went for a walk this morning before you were up, Torp. I saw
him making love to the butcher at the corner when the shutters were being taken
down--just as if he hadn't enough to eat in his own proper house," said Dick.

"Binks, is that a true bill?" said Torpenhow, severely. The little dog
retreated under the sofa cushion, and showed by the fat white back of him that
he really had no further interest in the discussion.

"Strikes me that another disreputable dog went for a walk, too," said the
Nilghai. "What made you get up so early? Torp said you might be buying a
horse."

"He knows it would need three of us for a serious business like that. No, I
felt lonesome and unhappy, so I went out to look at the sea, and watch the
pretty ships go by."

"Where did you go?"

"Somewhere on the Channel. Progly or Snigly, or some watering-place was its
name; I've forgotten; but it was only two hours" run from London and the ships
went by."

"Did you see anything you knew?"

"Only the Barralong outwards to Australia, and an Odessa grain-boat loaded down
by the head. It was a thick day, but the sea smelt good."

"Wherefore put on one's best trousers to see the Barralong?" said Torpenhow,
pointing.

"Because I've nothing except these things and my painting duds. Besides, I
wanted to do honour to the sea."

"Did She make you feel restless?" asked the Nilghai, keenly.

"Crazy. Don't speak of it. I'm sorry I went."

Torpenhow and the Nilghai exchanged a look as Dick, stooping, busied himself
among the former's boots and trees.

"These will do," he said at last; "I can't say I think much of your taste in
slippers, but the fit's the thing." He slipped his feet into a pair of sock-
like sambhur-skin foot coverings, found a long chair, and lay at length.

"They're my own pet pair," Torpenhow said. "I was just going to put them on
myself."

"All your reprehensible selfishness. Just because you see me happy for a
minute, you want to worry me and stir me up. Find another pair."

"Good for you that Dick can't wear your clothes, Torp. You two live
communistically," said the Nilghai.

"Dick never has anything that I can wear. He's only useful to sponge upon."

"Confound you, have you been rummaging round among my clothes, then?" said
Dick. "I put a sovereign in the tobacco-jar yesterday. How do you expect a man
to keep his accounts properly if you----"

Here the Nilghai began to laugh, and Torpenhow joined him.

"Hid a sovereign yesterday! You're no sort of financier. You lent me a fiver
about a month back. Do you remember?" Torpenhow said.

"Yes, of course."

"Do you remember that I paid it you ten days later, and you put it at the
bottom of the tobacco?"

"By Jove, did I? I thought it was in one of my colour-boxes."

"You thought! About a week ago I went into your studio to get some 'baccy and
found it."

"What did you do with it?"

"Took the Nilghai to a theatre and fed him."

"You couldn't feed the Nilghai under twice the money--not though you gave him
Army beef. Well, I suppose I should have found it out sooner or later. What is
there to laugh at?"

"You're a most amazing cuckoo in many directions," said the Nilghai, still
chuckling over the thought of the dinner. "Never mind. We had both been working
very hard, and it was your unearned increment we spent, and as you're only a
loafer it didn't matter."

"That's pleasant--from the man who is bursting with my meat, too. I'll get that
dinner back one of these days. Suppose we go to a theatre now."

"Put our boots on,--and dress,--and wash?" The Nilghai spoke very lazily.

"I withdraw the motion."

"Suppose, just for a change--as a startling variety, you know--we, that is to
say we, get our charcoal and our canvas and go on with our work."

Torpenhow spoke pointedly, but Dick only wriggled his toes inside the soft
leather moccasins.

"What a one-ideaed clucker that is! If I had any unfinished figures on hand, I
haven't any model; if I had my model, I haven't any spray, and I never leave
charcoal unfixed overnight; and if I had my spray and twenty photographs of
backgrounds, I couldn't do anything tonight. I don't feel that way."

"Binkie-dog, he's a lazy hog, isn't he?" said the Nilghai.

"Very good, I will do some work," said Dick, rising swiftly. "I"ll fetch the
Nungapunga Book, and we'll add another picture to the Nilghai Saga."

"Aren't you worrying him a little too much?" asked the Nilghai, when Dick had
left the room.

"Perhaps, but I know what he can turn out if he likes. It makes me savage to
hear him praised for past work when I know what he ought to do. You and I are
arranged for----"

"By Kismet and our own powers, more's the pity. I have dreamed of a good deal."

"So have I, but we know our limitations now. I'm dashed if I know what Dick's
may be when he gives himself to his work. That's what makes me so keen about
him."

"And when all's said and done, you will be put aside--quite rightly--for a
female girl."

"I wonder . . . Where do you think he has been today?"

"To the sea. Didn't you see the look in his eyes when he talked about her? He's
as restless as a swallow in autumn."

"Yes; but did he go alone?"

"I don't know, and I don't care, but he has the beginnings of the go-fever upon
him. He wants to up-stakes and move out. There's no mistaking the signs.
Whatever he may have said before, he has the call upon him now."

"It might be his salvation," Torpenhow said.

"Perhaps--if you care to take the responsibility of being a saviour."

Dick returned with the big clasped sketch-book that the Nilghai knew well and
did not love too much. In it Dick had drawn all manner of moving incidents,
experienced by himself or related to him by the others, of all the four corners
of the earth. But the wider range of the Nilghai's body and life attracted him
most. When truth failed he fell back on fiction of the wildest, and represented
incidents in the Nilghai's career that were unseemly,--his marriages with many
African princesses, his shameless betrayal, for Arab wives, of an army corps to
the Mahdi, his tattooment by skilled operators in Burmah, his interview (and
his fears) with the yellow headsman in the blood-stained execution-ground of
Canton, and finally, the passings of his spirit into the bodies of whales,
elephants, and toucans. Torpenhow from time to time had added rhymed
descriptions, and the whole was a curious piece of art, because Dick decided,
having regard to the name of the book which being interpreted means "naked,"
that it would be wrong to draw the Nilghai with any clothes on, under any
circumstances. Consequently the last sketch, representing that much-enduring
man calling on the War Office to press his claims to the Egyptian medal, was
hardly delicate. He settled himself comfortably on Torpenhow's table and turned
over the pages.

"What a fortune you would have been to Blake, Nilghai!" he said. "There's a
succulent pinkness about some of these sketches that's more than life-like.
"The Nilghai surrounded while bathing by the Mahdieh"--that was founded on
fact, eh?"

"It was very nearly my last bath, you irreverent dauber. Has Binkie come into
the Saga yet?"

"No; the Binkie-boy hasn't done anything except eat and kill cats. Let's see.
Here you are as a stained-glass saint in a church. Deuced decorative lines
about your anatomy; you ought to be grateful for being handed down to posterity
in this way. Fifty years hence you'll exist in rare and curious facsimiles at
ten guineas each. What shall I try this time? The domestic life of the
Nilghai?"

"Hasn't got any."

"The undomestic life of the Nilghai, then. Of course. Mass-meeting of his wives
in Trafalgar Square. That's it. They came from the ends of the earth to attend
Nilghai's wedding to an English bride. This shall be an epic. It's a sweet
material to work with."

"It's a scandalous waste of time," said Torpenhow.

"Don't worry; it keeps one's hand in--specially when you begin without the
pencil." He set to work rapidly. "That's Nelson's Column. Presently the Nilghai
will appear shinning up it."

"Give him some clothes this time."

"Certainly--a veil and an orange-wreath, because he's been married."

"Gad, that's clever enough!" said Torpenhow over his shoulder, as Dick brought
out of the paper with three twirls of the brush a very fat back and labouring
shoulder pressed against stone.

"Just imagine," Dick continued, "if we could publish a few of these dear little
things every time the Nilghai subsidises a man who can write, to give the
public an honest opinion of my pictures."

"Well, you'll admit I always tell you when I have done anything of that kind. I
know I can't hammer you as you ought to be hammered, so I give the job to
another. Young Maclagan, for instance----"

"No-o--one half-minute, old man; stick your hand out against the dark of the
wall-paper--you only burble and call me names. That left shoulder's out of
drawing. I must literally throw a veil over that. Where's my pen-knife? Well,
what about Maclagan?"

"I only gave him his riding-orders to--to lambast you on general principles for
not producing work that will last."

"Whereupon that young fool,"--Dick threw back his head and shut one eye as he
shifted the page under his hand,--"being left alone with an ink-pot and what he
conceived were his own notions, went and spilt them both over me in the papers.
You might have engaged a grown man for the business, Nilghai. How do you think
the bridal veil looks now, Torp?"

"How the deuce do three dabs and two scratches make the stuff stand away from
the body as it does?" said Torpenhow, to whom Dick"s methods were always new.

"It just depends on where you put 'em. If Maclagan had know that much about his
business he might have done better."

"Why don't you put the damned dabs into something that will stay, then?"
insisted the Nilghai, who had really taken considerable trouble in hiring for
Dick's benefit the pen of a young gentleman who devoted most of his waking
hours to an anxious consideration of the aims and ends of Art, which, he wrote,
was one and indivisible.

"Wait a minute till I see how I am going to manage my procession of wives. You
seem to have married extensively, and I must rough 'em in with the pencil--
Medes, Parthians, Edomites. . . . Now, setting aside the weakness and the
wickedness and--and the fat-headedness of deliberately trying to do work that
will live, as they call it, I'm content with the knowledge that I've done my
best up to date, and I shan't do anything like it again for some hours at
least--probably years. Most probably never."

"What! any stuff you have in stock your best work?" said Torpenhow.

"Anything you've sold?" said the Nilghai.

"Oh no. It isn't here and it isn't sold. Better than that, it can't be sold,
and I don't think any one knows where it is. I'm sure I don't. . . . And yet
more and more wives, on the north side of the square. Observe the virtuous
horror of the lions!"

"You may as well explain," said Torpenhow, and Dick lifted his head from the
paper.

"The sea reminded me of it," he said slowly. "I wish it hadn't. It weighs some
few thousand tons--unless you cut it out with a cold chisel."

"Don't be an idiot. You can't pose with us here," said the Nilghai.

"There's no pose in the matter at all. It's a fact. I was loafing from Lima to
Auckland in a big, old, condemned passenger-ship turned into a cargo-boat and
owned by a second-hand Italian firm. She was a crazy basket. We were cut down
to fifteen ton of coal a day, and we thought ourselves lucky when we kicked
seven knots an hour out of her. Then we used to stop and let the bearings cool
down, and wonder whether the crack in the shaft was spreading."

"Were you a steward or a stoker in those days?"

"I was flush for the time being, so I was a passenger, or else I should have
been a steward, I think," said Dick, with perfect gravity, returning to the
procession of angry wives. "I was the only other passenger from Lima, and the
ship was half empty, and full of rats and cockroaches and scorpions."

"But what has this to do with the picture?"

"Wait a minute. She had been in the China passenger trade and her lower decks
had bunks for two thousand pigtails. Those were all taken down, and she was
empty up to her nose, and the lights came through the port holes--most annoying
lights to work in till you got used to them. I hadn't anything to do for weeks.
The ship's charts were in pieces and our skipper daren't run south for fear of
catching a storm. So he did his best to knock all the Society Islands out of
the water one by one, and I went into the lower deck, and did my picture on the
port side as far forward in her as I could go. There was some brown paint and
some green paint that they used for the boats, and some black paint for
ironwork, and that was all I had."

"The passengers must have thought you mad."

"There was only one, and it was a woman; but it gave me the notion of my
picture."

"What was she like?" said Torpenhow.

"She was a sort of Negroid-Jewess-Cuban; with morals to match. She couldn't
read or write, and she didn't want to, but she used to come down and watch me
paint, and the skipper didn't like it, because he was paying her passage and
had to be on the bridge occasionally."

"I see. That must have been cheerful."

"It was the best time I ever had. To begin with, we didn't know whether we
should go up or go down any minute when there was a sea on; and when it was
calm it was paradise; and the woman used to mix the paints and talk broken
English, and the skipper used to steal down every few minutes to the lower
deck, because he said he was afraid of fire. So, you see, we could never tell
when we might be caught, and I had a splendid notion to work out in only three
keys of colour."

"What was the notion?"

"Two lines in Poe--

 'Neither the angels in Heaven above nor the demons down under the sea,
 Can ever dissever my soul from the soul of the beautiful Annabel Lee.'

It came out of the sea--all by itself. I drew that fight, fought out in green
water over the naked, choking soul, and the woman served as the model for the
devils and the angels both--sea-devils and sea-angels, and the soul half
drowned between them. It doesn't sound much, but when there was a good light on
the lower deck it looked very fine and creepy. It was seven by fourteen feet,
all done in shifting light for shifting light."

"Did the woman inspire you much?" said Torpenhow.

"She and the sea between them--immensely. There was a heap of bad drawing in
that picture. I remember I went out of my way to foreshorten for sheer delight
of doing it, and I foreshortened damnably, but for all that it's the best thing
I've ever done; and now I suppose the ship's broken up or gone down. Whew! What
a time that was!"

"What happened after all?"

"It all ended. They were loading her with wool when I left the ship, but even
the stevedores kept the picture clear to the last. The eyes of the demons
scared them, I honestly believe."

"And the woman?"

"She was scared too when it was finished. She used to cross herself before she
went down to look at it. Just three colours and no chance of getting any more,
and the sea outside and unlimited love-making inside, and the fear of death
atop of everything else, O Lord!" He had ceased to look at the sketch, but was
staring straight in front of him across the room.

"Why don't you try something of the same kind now?" said the Nilghai.

"Because those things come not by fasting and prayer. When I find a cargo-boat
and a Jewess-Cuban and another notion and the same old life, I may."

"You won't find them here," said the Nilghai.

"No, I shall not." Dick shut the sketch-book with a bang. "This room's as hot
as an oven. Open the window, some one."

He leaned into the darkness, watching the greater darkness of London below him.
The chambers stood much higher than the other houses, commanding a hundred
chimneys--crooked cowls that looked like sitting cats as they swung round, and
other uncouth brick and zinc mysteries supported by iron stanchions and clamped
by 8-pieces. Northward the lights of Piccadilly Circus and Leicester Square
threw a copper-coloured glare above the black roofs, and southward by all the
orderly lights of the Thames. A train rolled out across one of the railway
bridges, and its thunder drowned for a minute the dull roar of the streets. The
Nilghai looked at his watch and said shortly, "That's the Paris night-mail. You
can book from here to St. Petersburg if you choose."

Dick crammed head and shoulders out of the window and looked across the river.
Torpenhow came to his side, while the Nilghai passed over quietly to the piano
and opened it. Binkie, making himself as large as possible, spread out upon the
sofa with the air of one who is not to be lightly disturbed.

"Well," said the Nilghai to the two pairs of shoulders, "have you never seen
this place before?"

A steam-tug on the river hooted as she towed her barges to wharf. Then the boom
of the traffic came into the room. Torpenhow nudged Dick.

"Good place to bank in--bad place to bunk in, Dickie, isn't it?"

Dick's chin was in his hand as he answered, in the words of a general not
without fame, still looking out on the darkness--"'My God, what a city to
loot!'"

Binkie found the night air tickling his whiskers and sneezed plaintively.

"We shall give the Binkie-dog a cold," said Torpenhow. "Come in," and they
withdrew their heads. "You'll be buried in Kensal Green, Dick, one of these
days, if it isn't closed by the time you want to go there--buried within two
feet of some one else, his wife and his family."

"Allah forbid! I shall get away before that time comes. Give a man room to
stretch his legs, Mr. Binkie." Dick flung himself down on the sofa and tweaked
Binkie's velvet ears, yawning heavily the while.

"You'll find that wardrobe-case very much out of tune," Torpenhow said to the
Nilghai. "It's never touched except by you."

"A piece of gross extravagance," Dick grunted. "The Nilghai only comes when I'm
out."

"That's because you're always out. Howl, Nilghai, and let him hear."

"The life of the Nilghai is fraud and slaughter, His writings are watered
Dickens and water; But the voice of the Nilghai raised on high Makes even the
Mahdieh glad to die!"

Dick quoted from Torpenhow's letterpress in the Nungapunga Book.

"How do they call moose in Canada, Nilghai?"

The man laughed. Singing was his one polite accomplishment, as many Press-tents
in far-off lands had known.

"What shall I sing?" said he, turning in the chair.

""Moll Roe in the Morning,"" said Torpenhow, at a venture.

"No," said Dick, sharply, and the Nilghai opened his eyes. The old chanty
whereof he, among a very few, possessed all the words was not a pretty one, but
Dick had heard it many times before without wincing. Without prelude he
launched into that stately tune that calls together and troubles the hearts of
the gipsies of the sea--

"Farewell and adieu to you, Spanish ladies, Farewell and adieu to you, ladies
of Spain."

Dick turned uneasily on the sofa, for he could hear the bows of the Barralong
crashing into the green seas on her way to the Southern Cross.

Then came the chorus--

"We'll rant and we'll roar like true British sailors, We'll rant and we'll roar
across the salt seas, Until we take soundings in the Channel of Old England
From Ushant to Scilly 'tis forty-five leagues."

"Thirty-five-thirty-five," said Dick, petulantly. "Don't tamper with Holy Writ.
Go on, Nilghai."

"The first land we made it was called the Deadman,"

and they sang to the end very vigourously.

"That would be a better song if her head were turned the other way--to the
Ushant light, for instance," said the Nilghai.

"Flinging his arms about like a mad windmill," said Torpenhow. "Give us
something else, Nilghai. You're in fine fog-horn form tonight."

"Give us the 'Ganges Pilot'; you sang that in the square the night before El-
Maghrib. By the way, I wonder how many of the chorus are alive tonight," said
Dick.

Torpenhow considered for a minute. "By Jove! I believe only you and I. Raynor,
Vicery, and Deenes--all dead; Vincent caught smallpox in Cairo, carried it here
and died of it. Yes, only you and I and the Nilghai."

"Umph! And yet the men here who've done their work in a well-warmed studio all
their lives, with a policeman at each corner, say that I charge too much for my
pictures."

"They are buying your work, not your insurance policies, dear child," said the
Nilghai.

"I gambled with one to get at the other. Don't preach. Go on with the "Pilot."
Where in the world did you get that song?"

"On a tombstone," said the Nilghai. "On a tombstone in a distant land. I made
it an accompaniment with heaps of base chords."

"Oh, Vanity! Begin." And the Nilghai began--

"I have slipped my cable, messmates, I'm drifting down with the tide, I have my
sailing orders, while yet at anchor ride.
And never on fair June morning have I put out to sea With clearer conscience or
better hope, or a heart more light and free.

"Shoulder to shoulder, Joe, my boy, into the crowd like a wedge Strike with the
hangers, messmates, but do not cut with the edge.
Cries Charnock, "Scatter the faggots, double that Brahmin in two, The tall pale
widow for me, Joe, the little brown girl for you!"

"Young Joe (you're nearing sixty), why is your hide so dark? Katie has soft
fair blue eyes, who blackened yours?--Why, hark!"

They were all singing now, Dick with the roar of the wind of the open sea about
his ears as the deep bass voice let itself go.

"The morning gun--Ho, steady! the arquebuses to me! I ha' sounded the Dutch
High Admiral's heart as my lead doth sound the sea.

"Sounding, sounding the Ganges, floating down with the tide, Moore me close to
Charnock, next to my nut-brown bride.
My blessing to Kate at Fairlight--Holwell, my thanks to you; Steady! We steer
for heaven, through sand-drifts cold and blue."

"Now what is there in that nonsense to make a man restless?" said Dick, hauling
Binkie from his feet to his chest.

"It depends on the man," said Torpenhow.

"The man who has been down to look at the sea," said the Nilghai.

"I didn't know she was going to upset me in this fashion."

"That's what men say when they go to say good-bye to a woman. It's more easy
though to get rid of three women than a piece of one's life and surroundings."

"But a woman can be----" began Dick, unguardedly.

"A piece of one's life," continued Torpenhow. "No, she can't." His face
darkened for a moment. "She says she wants to sympathise with you and help you
in your work, and everything else that clearly a man must do for himself. Then
she sends round five notes a day to ask why the dickens you haven't been
wasting your time with her."

"Don't generalise," said the Nilghai. "By the time you arrive at five notes a
day you must have gone through a good deal and behaved accordingly. Shouldn't
begin these things, my son."

"I shouldn't have gone down to the sea," said Dick, just a little anxious to
change the conversation. "And you shouldn't have sung."

"The sea isn't sending you five notes a day," said the Nilghai.

"No, but I'm fatally compromised. She's an enduring old hag, and I"m sorry I
ever met her. Why wasn't I born and bred and dead in a three-pair back?"

"Hear him blaspheming his first love! Why in the world shouldn't you listen to
her?" said Torpenhow.

Before Dick could reply the Nilghai lifted up his voice with a shout that shook
the windows, in "The Men of the Sea," that begins, as all know, "The sea is a
wicked old woman," and after wading through eight lines whose imagery is
truthful, ends in a refrain, slow as the clacking of a capstan when the boat
comes unwillingly up to the bars where the men sweat and tramp in the shingle.

"'Ye that bore us, O restore us! She is kinder than ye; For the call is on our
heart-strings!' Said The Men of the Sea."

The Nilghai sang that verse twice, with simple cunning, intending that Dick
should hear. But Dick was waiting for the farewell of the men to their wives.

"'Ye that love us, can ye move us? She is dearer than ye; And your sleep will
be the sweeter,' Said The Men of the Sea."

The rough words beat like the blows of the waves on the bows of the rickety
boat from Lima in the days when Dick was mixing paints, making love, drawing
devils and angels in the half dark, and wondering whether the next minute would
put the Italian captain's knife between his shoulder-blades. And the go-fever
which is more real than many doctors' diseases, waked and raged, urging him who
loved Maisie beyond anything in the world, to go away and taste the old hot,
unregenerate life again,--to scuffle, swear, gamble, and love light loves with
his fellows; to take ship and know the sea once more, and by her beget
pictures; to talk to Binat among the sands of Port Said while Yellow Tina mixed
the drinks; to hear the crackle of musketry, and see the smoke roll outward,
thin and thicken again till the shining black faces came through, and in that
hell every man was strictly responsible for his own head, and his own alone,
and struck with an unfettered arm. It was impossible, utterly impossible, but--

"'Oh, our fathers in the churchyard, She is older than ye, And our graves will
be the greener,' Said The Men of the Sea."

"What is there to hinder?" said Torpenhow, in the long hush that followed the
song.

"You said a little time since that you wouldn't come for a walk round the
world, Torp."

"That was months ago, and I only objected to your making money for travelling
expenses. You've shot your bolt here and it has gone home. Go away and do some
work, and see some things."

"Get some of the fat off you; you're disgracefully out of condition," said the
Nilghai, making a plunge from the chair and grasping a handful of Dick
generally over the right ribs. "Soft as putty--pure tallow born of over-
feeding. Train it off, Dickie."

"We're all equally gross, Nilghai. Next time you have to take the field you'll
sit down, wink your eyes, gasp, and die in a fit."

"Never mind. You go away on a ship. Go to Lima again, or to Brazil. There's
always trouble in South America."

"Do you suppose I want to be told where to go? Great Heavens, the only
difficulty is to know where I'm to stop. But I shall stay here, as I told you
before."

"Then you'll be buried in Kensal Green and turn into adipocere with the
others," said Torpenhow. "Are you thinking of commissions in hand? Pay forfeit
and go. You've money enough to travel as a king if you please."

"You've the grisliest notions of amusement, Torp. I think I see myself shipping
first class on a six-thousand-ton hotel, and asking the third engineer what
makes the engines go round, and whether it isn't very warm in the stokehold.
Ho! ho! I should ship as a loafer if ever I shipped at all, which I'm not going
to do. I shall compromise, and go for a small trip to begin with."

"That's something at any rate. Where will you go?" said Torpenhow. "It would do
you all the good in the world, old man."

The Nilghai saw the twinkle in Dick's eye, and refrained from speech.

"I shall go in the first place to Rathray's stable, where I shall hire one
horse, and take him very carefully as far as Richmond Hill. Then I shall walk
him back again, in case he should accidentally burst into a lather and make
Rathray angry. I shall do that tomorrow, for the sake of air and exercise."

"Bah!" Dick had barely time to throw up his arm and ward off the cushion that
the disgusted Torpenhow heaved at his head.

"Air and exercise indeed," said the Nilghai, sitting down heavily on Dick.

"Let's give him a little of both. Get the bellows, Torp."

At this point the conference broke up in disorder, because Dick would not open
his mouth till the Nilghai held his nose fast, and there was some trouble in
forcing the nozzle of the bellows between his teeth; and even when it was there
he weakly tried to puff against the force of the blast, and his cheeks blew up
with a great explosion; and the enemy becoming helpless with laughter he so
beat them over the head with a soft sofa cushion that became unsewn and
distributed its feathers, and Binkie, interfering in Torpenhow's interests, was
bundled into the half-empty bag and advised to scratch his way out, which he
did after a while, travelling rapidly up and down the floor in the shape of an
agitated green haggis, and when he came out looking for satisfaction, the three
pillars of his world were picking feathers out of their hair.

"A prophet has no honour in his own country," said Dick, ruefully, dusting his
knees. "This filthy fluff will never brush off my legs."

"It was all for your own good," said the Nilghai. "Nothing like air and
exercise."

"All for your good," said Torpenhow, not in the least with reference to past
clowning. "It would let you focus things at their proper worth and prevent your
becoming slack in this hothouse of a town. Indeed it would, old man. I
shouldn't have spoken if I hadn't thought so. Only, you make a joke of
everything."

"Before God I do no such thing," said Dick, quickly and earnestly. "You don't
know me if you think that."

I don't think it," said the Nilghai.

"How can fellows like ourselves, who know what life and death really mean, dare
to make a joke of anything? I know we pretend it, to save ourselves from
breaking down or going to the other extreme. Can't I see, old man, how you're
always anxious about me, and try to advise me to make my work better? Do you
suppose I don't think about that myself? But you can't help me--you can't help
me--not even you. I must play my own hand alone in my own way."

"Hear, hear," from the Nilghai.

"What's the one thing in the Nilghai Saga that I've never drawn in the
Nungapunga Book?" Dick continued to Torpenhow, who was a little astonished at
the outburst.

Now there was one blank page in the book given over to the sketch that Dick had
not drawn of the crowning exploit in the Nilghai's life; when that man, being
young and forgetting that his body and bones belonged to the paper that
employed him, had ridden over sunburned slippery grass in the rear of Bredow's
brigade on the day that the troopers flung themselves at Caurobert's artillery,
and for aught they knew twenty battalions in front, to save the battered 24th
German Infantry, to give time to decide the fate of Vionville, and to learn ere
their remnant came back to Flavigay that cavalry can attack and crumple and
break unshaken infantry. Whenever he was inclined to think over a life that
might have been better, an income that might have been larger, and a soul that
might have been considerably cleaner, the Nilghai would comfort himself with
the thought, "I rode with Bredow's brigade at Vionville," and take heart for
any lesser battle the next day might bring.

"I know," he said very gravely. "I was always glad that you left it out."

"I left it out because Nilghai taught me what the Germany army learned then,
and what Schmidt taught their cavalry. I don't know German.

What is it? 'Take care of the time and the dressing will take care of itself.'
I must ride my own line to my own beat, old man."

"Tempe ist richtung. You've learned your lesson well," said the Nilghai.

"He must go alone. He speaks truth, Torp."

"Maybe I'm as wrong as I can be--hideously wrong. I must find that out for
myself, as I have to think things out for myself, but I daren't turn my head to
dress by the next man. It hurts me a great deal more than you know not to be
able to go, but I cannot, that's all. I must do my own work and live my own
life in my own way, because I'm responsible for both.

Only don't think I frivol about it, Torp. I have my own matches and sulphur,
and I'll make my own hell, thanks."

There was an uncomfortable pause. Then Torpenhow said blandly, "What did the
Governor of North Carolina say to the Governor of South Carolina?"

"Excellent notion. It is a long time between drinks. There are the makings of a
very fine prig in you, Dick," said the Nilghai.

"I've liberated my mind, estimable Binkie, with the feathers in his mouth."
Dick picked up the still indignant one and shook him tenderly. "You're tied up
in a sack and made to run about blind, Binkie-wee, without any reason, and it
has hurt your little feelings. Never mind. Sic volo, sic jubeo, stet pro
ratione voluntas, and don't sneeze in my eye because I talk Latin. Good night."

He went out of the room.

"That's distinctly one for you," said the Nilghai. "I told you it was hopeless
to meddle with him. He's not pleased."

"He'd swear at me if he weren't. I can't make it out. He has the go-fever upon
him and he won't go. I only hope that he mayn't have to go some day when he
doesn't want to," said Torpenhow.
* * * * * *

In his own room Dick was settling a question with himself--and the question was
whether all the world, and all that was therein, and a burning desire to
exploit both, was worth one threepenny piece thrown into the Thames.

"It came of seeing the sea, and I'm a cur to think about it," he decided.
"After all, the honeymoon will be that tour--with reservations; only . . .
only I didn't realise that the sea was so strong. I didn't feel it so much when
I was with Maisie. These damnable songs did it. He's beginning again."

But it was only Herrick's Nightpiece to Julia that the Nilghai sang, and before
it was ended Dick reappeared on the threshold, not altogether clothed indeed,
but in his right mind, thirsty and at peace.

The mood had come and gone with the rising and the falling of the tide by Fort
Keeling.


CHAPTER IX

 "If I have taken the common clay
 And wrought it cunningly
 In the shape of a god that was digged a clod,
 The greater honour to me."

 "If thou hast taken the common clay,
 And thy hands be not free
 From the taint of the soil,  thou hast made thy spoil
 The greater shame to thee."
         --The Two Potters

HE DID no work of any kind for the rest of the week. Then came another Sunday.
He dreaded and longed for the day always, but since the red-haired girl had
sketched him there was rather more dread than desire in his mind.

He found that Maisie had entirely neglected his suggestions about line-work.
She had gone off at score filed with some absurd notion for a "fancy head." It
cost Dick something to command his temper.

"What's the good of suggesting anything?" he said pointedly.

"Ah, but this will be a picture,--a real picture; and I know that Kami will let
me send it to the Salon. You don't mind, do you?"

"I suppose not. But you won't have time for the Salon."

Maisie hesitated a little. She even felt uncomfortable.

"We're going over to France a month sooner because of it. I shall get the idea
sketched out here and work it up at Kami"s.

Dick's heart stood still, and he came very near to being disgusted with his
queen who could do no wrong. "Just when I thought I had made some headway, she
goes off chasing butterflies. It's too maddening!"

There was no possibility of arguing, for the red-haired girl was in the studio.
Dick could only look unutterable reproach.

"I'm sorry," he said, "and I think you make a mistake. But what's the idea of
your new picture?"

"I took it from a book."

"That's bad, to begin with. Books aren't the places for pictures. And----"

"It's this," said the red-haired girl behind him. "I was reading it to Maisie
the other day from The City of Dreadful Night. D'you know the book?"

"A little. I am sorry I spoke. There are pictures in it. What has taken her
fancy?"

"The description of the Melancolia--

 'Her folded wings as of a mighty eagle,
 But all too impotent to lift the regal
 Robustness of her earth-born strength and pride.

And here again. (Maisie, get the tea, dear.)

 'The forehead charged with baleful thoughts and dreams,
 The household bunch of keys, the housewife's gown,
 Voluminous indented, and yet rigid
 As though a shell of burnished metal frigid,
 Her feet thick-shod to tread all weakness down."

There was no attempt to conceal the scorn of the lazy voice. Dick winced.

"But that has been done already by an obscure artist by the name of Durer,"
said he. "How does the poem run?--

 'Three centuries and threescore years ago,
 With phantasies of his peculiar thought.'

You might as well try to rewrite Hamlet. It will be a waste of time."

"No, it won't," said Maisie, putting down the teacups with a clatter to
reassure herself. "And I mean to do it. Can't you see what a beautiful thing it
would make?"

"How in perdition can one do work when one hasn't had the proper training? Any
fool can get a notion. It needs training to drive the thing through,--training
and conviction; not rushing after the first fancy." Dick spoke between his
teeth.

"You don't understand," said Maisie. "I think I can do it."

Again the voice of the girl behind him--

"Baffled and beaten back, she works on still; Weary and sick of soul, she works
the more.

Sustained by her indomitable will, The hands shall fashion, and the brain shall
pore, And all her sorrow shall be turned to labour----

I fancy Maisie means to embody herself in the picture."

"Sitting on a throne of rejected pictures? No, I shan't, dear. The notion in
itself has fascinated me.--Of course you don't care for fancy heads, Dick. I
don't think you could do them. You like blood and bones."

"That's a direct challenge. If you can do a Melancolia that isn't merely a
sorrowful female head, I can do a better one; and I will, too. What d'you know
about Melacolias?" Dick firmly believed that he was even then tasting three-
quarters of all the sorrow in the world.

"She was a woman," said Maisie, "and she suffered a great deal,--till she could
suffer no more. Then she began to laugh at it all, and then I painted her and
sent her to the Salon."

The red-haired girl rose up and left the room, laughing.

Dick looked at Maisie humbly and hopelessly.

"Never mind about the picture," he said. "Are you really going back to Kami's
for a month before your time?"

"I must, if I want to get the picture done."

"And that's all you want?"

"Of course. Don't be stupid, Dick."

"You haven't the power. You have only the ideas--the ideas and the little cheap
impulses. How you could have kept at your work for ten years steadily is a
mystery to me. So you are really going,--a month before you need?"

"I must do my work."

"Your work--bah! . . . No, I didn't mean that. It's all right, dear. Of course
you must do your work, and--I think I'll say goodbye for this week."

"Won't you even stay for tea? "No, thank you. Have I your leave to go, dear?
There's nothing more you particularly want me to do, and the line-work doesn't
matter."

"I wish you could stay, and then we could talk over my picture. If only one
single picture's a success, it draws attention to all the others. I know some
of my work is good, if only people could see. And you needn't have been so rude
about it."

"I'm sorry. We'll talk the Melancolia over some one of the other Sundays.

There are four more--yes, one, two, three, four--before you go. Goodbye,
Maisie."

Maisie stood by the studio window, thinking, till the red-haired girl returned,
a little white at the corners of her lips.

"Dick's gone off," said Maisie. "Just when I wanted to talk about the picture.
Isn't it selfish of him?"

Her companion opened her lips as if to speak, shut them again, and went on
reading The City of Dreadful Night.

Dick was in the Park, walking round and round a tree that he had chosen as his
confidante for many Sundays past. He was swearing audibly, and when he found
that the infirmities of the English tongue hemmed in his rage, he sought
consolation in Arabic, which is expressly designed for the use of the
afflicted. He was not pleased with the reward of his patient service; nor was
he pleased with himself; and it was long before he arrived at the proposition
that the queen could do no wrong.

"It's a losing game," he said. "I'm worth nothing when a whim of hers is in
question. But in a losing game at Port Said we used to double the stakes and go
on. She do a Melancolia! She hasn't the power, or the insight, or the training.
Only the desire. She's cursed with the curse of Reuben. She won't do line-work,
because it means real work; and yet she's stronger than I am. I'll make her
understand that I can beat her on her own Melancolia. Even then she wouldn't
care. She says I can only do blood and bones. I don't believe she has blood in
her veins. All the same I lover her; and I must go on loving her; and if I can
humble her inordinate vanity I will. I'll do a Melancolia that shall be
something like a Melancolia  'the Melancolia that transcends all wit.' I'll do
it at once, con--bless her."

He discovered that the notion would not come to order, and that he could not
free his mind for an hour from the thought of Maisie's departure. He took very
small interest in her rough studies for the Melancolia when she showed them
next week. The Sundays were racing past, and the time was at hand when all the
church bells in London could not ring Maisie back to him. Once or twice he said
something to Binkie about 'hermaphroditic futilities,' but the little dog
received so many confidences both from Torpenhow and Dick that he did not
trouble his tulip-ears to listen.

Dick was permitted to see the girls off. They were going by the Dover night-
boat; and they hoped to return in August. It was then February, and Dick felt
that he was being hardly used. Maisie was so busy stripping the small house
across the Park, and packing her canvases, that she had not time for thought.
Dick went down to Dover and wasted a day there fretting over a wonderful
possibility. Would Maisie at the very last allow him one small kiss? He
reflected that he might capture her by the strong arm, as he had seem women
captured in the Southern Soudan, and lead her away; but Maisie would never be
led. She would turn her gray eyes upon him and say, "Dick, how selfish you
are!" Then his courage would fail him. It would be better, after all, to beg
for that kiss.

Maisie looked more than usually kissable as she stepped from the night-mail on
to the windy pier, in a gray waterproof and a little gray cloth travelling-cap.
The red-haired girl was not so lovely. Her green eyes were hollow and her lips
were dry. Dick saw the trunks aboard, and went to Maisie's side in the darkness
under the bridge. The mail-bags were thundering into the forehold, and the red-
haired girl was watching them.

"You'll have a rough passage tonight," said Dick. "It's blowing outside. I
suppose I may come over and see you if I'm good?"

"You mustn't. I shall be busy. At least, if I want you I'll send for you. But I
shall write from Vitry-sur-Marne. I shall have heaps of things to consult you
about. Oh, Dick, you have been so good to me!--so good to me!"

"Thank you for that, dear. It hasn't made any difference, has it?"

"I can't tell a fib. It hasn't--in that way. But don't think I'm not grateful."

"Damn the gratitude!" said Dick, huskily, to the paddle-box.

"What's the use of worrying? You know I should ruin your life, and you'd ruin
mine, as things are now. You remember what you said when you were so angry that
day in the Park? One of us has to be broken. Can't you wait till that day
comes?"

"No, love. I want you unbroken--all to myself."

Maisie shook her head. "My poor Dick, what can I say!"

"Don't say anything. Give me a kiss. Only one kiss, Maisie. I'll swear I won't
take any more. You might as well, and then I can be sure you're grateful."

Maisie put her cheek forward, and Dick took his reward in the darkness.

It was only one kiss, but, since there was no time-limit specified, it was a
long one. Maisie wrenched herself free angrily, and Dick stood abashed and
tingling from head to toe.

"Goodbye, darling. I didn't mean to scare you. I'm sorry. Only--keep well and
do good work,--specially the Melancolia. I'm going to do one, too. Remember me
to Kami, and be careful what you drink. Country drinking-water is bad
everywhere, but it's worse in France. Write to me if you want anything, and
good-bye. Say good-bye to the whatever-you-call-um girl, and--can't I have
another kiss? No. You're quite right. Goodbye."

A shout told him that it was not seemly to charge of the mail-bag incline. He
reached the pier as the steamer began to move off, and he followed her with his
heart.

"And there's nothing--nothing in the wide world--to keep us apart except her
obstinacy. These Calais night-boats are much too small. I'll get Torp to write
to the papers about it. She's beginning to pitch already."

Maisie stood where Dick had left her till she heard a little gasping cough at
her elbow. The red-haired girl's eyes were alight with cold flame.

"He kissed you!" she said. "How could you let him, when he wasn't anything to
you? How dared you to take a kiss from him? Oh, Maisie, let's go to the ladies'
cabin. I'm sick,--deadly sick."

"We aren't into open water yet. Go down, dear, and I'll stay here. I don't like
the smell of the engines. . . . Poor Dick! He deserved one,--only one.
But I didn't think he'd frighten me so."

Dick returned to town next day just in time for lunch, for which he had
telegraphed. To his disgust, there were only empty plates in the studio.

He lifted up his voice like the bears in the fairy-tale, and Torpenhow entered,
looking guilty.

"H'sh!" said he. "Don't make such a noise. I took it. Come into my rooms, and
I'll show you why."

Dick paused amazed at the threshold, for on Torpenhow's sofa lay a girl asleep
and breathing heavily. The little cheap sailor-hat, the blue-and-white dress,
fitter for June than for February, dabbled with mud at the skirts, the jacket
trimmed with imitation Astrakhan and ripped at the shoulder-seams, the one-and-
elevenpenny umbrella, and, above all, the disgraceful condition of the kid-
topped boots, declared all things.

"Oh, I say, old man, this is too bad! You mustn't bring this sort up here. They
steal things from the rooms."

"It looks bad, I admit, but I was coming in after lunch, and she staggered into
the hall. I thought she was drunk at first, but it was collapse. I couldn't
leave her as she was, so I brought her up here and gave her your lunch. She was
fainting from want of food. She went fast asleep the minute she had finished."

"I know something of that complaint. She's been living on sausages, I suppose.
Torp, you should have handed her over to a policeman for presuming to faint in
a respectable house. Poor little wretch! Look at the face! There isn't an ounce
of immorality in it. Only folly,--slack, fatuous, feeble, futile folly. It's a
typical head. D'you notice how the skull begins to show through the flesh
padding on the face and cheek-bone?"

"What a cold-blooded barbarian it is! Don't hit a woman when she's down. Can't
we do anything? She was simply dropping with starvation. She almost fell into
my arms, and when she got to the food she ate like a wild beast. It was
horrible."

"I can give her money, which she would probably spend in drinks. Is she going
to sleep for ever?"

The girl opened her eyes and glared at the men between terror and effrontery.

"Feeling better?" said Torpenhow.

"Yes. Thank you. There aren't many gentlemen that are as kind as you are. Thank
you."

"When did you leave service?" said Dick, who had been watching the scarred and
chapped hands.

"How did you know I was in service? I was. General servant. I didn't like it."

"And how do you like being your own mistress?"

"Do I look as if I liked it?"

"I suppose not. One moment. Would you be good enough to turn your face to the
window?"

The girl obeyed, and Dick watched her face keenly,--so keenly that she made as
if to hide behind Torpenhow.

"The eyes have it," said Dick, walking up and down. "They are superb eyes for
my business. And, after all, every head depends on the eyes. This has been sent
from heaven to make up for--what was taken away. Now the weekly strain's off my
shoulders, I can get to work in earnest. Evidently sent from heaven. Yes. Raise
your chin a little, please."

"Gently, old man, gently. You're scaring somebody out of her wits," said
Torpenhow, who could see the girl trembling.

"Don't let him hit me! Oh, please don't let him hit me! I've been hit cruel
today because I spoke to a man. Don't let him look at me like that! He's
reg'lar wicked, that one. Don't let him look at me like that, neither! Oh, I
feel as if I hadn't nothing on when he looks at me like that!"

The overstrained nerves in the frail body gave way, and the girl wept like a
little child and began to scream. Dick threw open the window, and Torpenhow
flung the door back.

"There you are," said Dick, soothingly. "My friend here can call for a
policeman, and you can run through that door. Nobody is going to hurt you."

The girl sobbed convulsively for a few minutes, and then tried to laugh.

"Nothing in the world to hurt you. Now listen to me for a minute. I"m what they
call an artist by profession. You know what artists do?"

"They draw the things in red and black ink on the pop-shop labels."

"I dare say. I haven't risen to pop-shop labels yet. Those are done by the
Academicians. I want to draw your head."

"What for?"

"Because it's pretty. That is why you will come to the room across the landing
three times a week at eleven in the morning, and I'll give you three quid a
week just for sitting still and being drawn. And there's a quid on account."

"For nothing? Oh, my!" The girl turned the sovereign in her hand, and with more
foolish tears, "Ain't neither 'o you two gentlemen afraid of my bilking you?"

"No. Only ugly girls do that. Try and remember this place. And, by the way,
what's your name?"

"I'm Bessie,--Bessie----It's no use giving the rest. Bessie Broke,--Stone-
broke, if you like. What's your names? But there,--no one ever gives the real
ones."

Dick consulted Torpenhow with his eyes.

"My name's Heldar, and my friend's called Torpenhow; and you must be sure to
come here. Where do you live?"

"South-the-water,--one room,--five and sixpence a week. Aren't you making fun
of me about that three quid?"

"You'll see later on. And, Bessie, next time you come, remember, you needn't
wear that paint. It's bad for the skin, and I have all the colours you'll be
likely to need."

Bessie withdrew, scrubbing her cheek with a ragged pocket-handkerchief. The two
men looked at each other.

"You're a man," said Torpenhow.

"I'm afraid I've been a fool. It isn't our business to run about the earth
reforming Bessie Brokes. And a woman of any kind has no right on this landing."

"Perhaps she won't come back."

"She will if she thinks she can get food and warmth here. I know she will,
worse luck. But remember, old man, she isn't a woman; she's my model; and be
careful."

"The idea! She's a dissolute little scarecrow,--a gutter-snippet and nothing
more."

"So you think. Wait till she has been fed a little and freed from fear. That
fair type recovers itself very quickly. You won't know her in a week or two,
when that abject fear has died out of her eyes. She'll be too happy and smiling
for my purposes."

"But surely you're not taking her out of charity?--to please me?"

"I am not in the habit of playing with hot coals to please anybody. She has
been sent from heaven, as I may have remarked before, to help me with my
Melancolia."

"Never heard a word about the lady before."

"What's the use of having a friend, if you must sling your notions at him in
words? You ought to know what I'm thinking about. You've heard me grunt
lately?"

"Even so; but grunts mean anything in your language, from bad 'baccy to wicked
dealers. And I don't think I've been much in your confidence for some time."

"It was a high and soulful grunt. You ought to have understood that it meant
the Melancolia." Dick walked Torpenhow up and down the room, keeping silence.
Then he smote him in the ribs, "Now don't you see it? Bessie's abject futility,
and the terror in her eyes, welded on to one or two details in the way of
sorrow that have come under my experience lately. Likewise some orange and
black,--two keys of each. But I  can't explain on an empty stomach."

"It sounds mad enough. You'd better stick to your soldiers, Dick, instead of
maundering about heads and eyes and experiences."

"Think so?" Dick began to dance on his heels, singing--

"They're as proud as a turkey when they hold the ready cash,
You ought to 'ear the way they laugh an' joke;
They are tricky an' they're funny when they've got the ready money,--
Ow! but see 'em when they're all stone-broke."

Then he sat down to pour out his heart to Maisie in a four-sheet letter of
counsel and encouragement, and registered an oath that he would get to work
with an undivided heart as soon as Bessie should reappear.

The girl kept her appointment unpainted and unadorned, afraid and overbold by
turns. When she found that she was merely expected to sit still, she grew
calmer, and criticised the appointments of the studio with freedom and some
point. She liked the warmth and the comfort and the release from fear of
physical pain. Dick made two or three studies of her head in monochrome, but
the actual notion of the Melancolia would not arrive.

"What a mess you keep your things in!" said Bessie, some days later, when she
felt herself thoroughly at home. "I s'pose your clothes are just as bad.
Gentlemen never think what buttons and tape are made for."

"I buy things to wear, and wear 'em till they go to pieces. I don"t know what
Torpenhow does."

Bessie made diligent inquiry in the latter's room, and unearthed a bale of
disreputable socks. "Some of these I'll mend now," she said, "and some I'll
take home. D'you know, I sit all day long at home doing nothing, just like a
lady, and no more noticing them other girls in the house than if they was so
many flies. I don't have any unnecessary words, but I put 'em down quick, I can
tell you, when they talk to me. No; it's quite nice these days. I lock my door,
and they can only call me names through the keyhole, and I sit inside, just
like a lady, mending socks. Mr. Torpenhow wears his socks out both ends at
once."

"Three quid a week from me, and the delights of my society. No socks mended.
Nothing from Torp except a nod on the landing now and again, and all his socks
mended. Bessie is very much a woman," thought Dick; and he looked at her
between half-shut eyes. Food and rest had transformed the girl, as Dick knew
they would.

"What are you looking at me like that for?" she said quickly. "Don"t. You look
reg'lar bad when you look that way. You don't think much o" me, do you?"

"That depends on how you behave."

Bessie behaved beautifully. Only it was difficult at the end of a sitting to
bid her go out into the gray streets. She very much preferred the studio and a
big chair by the stove, with some socks in her lap as an excuse for delay. Then
Torpenhow would come in, and Bessie would be moved to tell strange and
wonderful stories of her past, and still stranger ones of her present improved
circumstances. She would make them tea as though she had a right to make it;
and once or twice on these occasions Dick caught Torpenhow's eyes fixed on the
trim little figure, and because Bessie's flittings about the room made Dick
ardently long for Maisie, he realised whither Torpenhow's thoughts were
tending. And Bessie was exceedingly careful of the condition of Torpenhow's
linen. She spoke very little to him, but sometimes they talked together on the
landing.

"I was a great fool," Dick said to himself. "I know what red firelight looks
like when a man's tramping through a strange town; and ours is a lonely,
selfish sort of life at the best. I wonder Maisie doesn't feel that sometimes.
But I can't order Bessie away. That's the worst of beginning things. One never
knows where they stop."

One evening, after a sitting prolonged to the last limit of the light, Dick was
roused from a nap by a broken voice in Torpenhow's room. He jumped to his feet.
"Now what ought I to do? It looks foolish to go in.--Oh, bless you, Binkie!"
The little terrier thrust Torpenhow's door open with his nose and came out to
take possession of Dick's chair. The door swung wide unheeded, and Dick across
the landing could see Bessie in the half-light making her little supplication
to Torpenhow. She was kneeling by his side, and her hands were clasped across
his knee.

"I know,--I know," she said thickly. "'Tisn't right 'o me to do this, but I
can't help it; and you were so kind,--so kind; and you never took any notice 'o
me. And I've mended all your things so carefully,--I did. Oh, please, 'tisn't
as if I was asking you to marry me. I wouldn't think of it. But you--couldn't
you take and live with me till Miss Right comes along? I'm only Miss Wrong, I
know, but I'd work my hands to the bare bone for you. And I'm not ugly to look
at. Say you will!"

Dick hardly recognised Torpenhow's voice in reply--"But look here. It's no use.
I'm liable to be ordered off anywhere at a minute's notice if a war breaks out.
At a minute's notice--dear."

"What does that matter? Until you go, then. Until you go. 'Tisn't much I'm
asking, and--you don't know how good I can cook." She had put an arm round his
neck and was drawing his head down.

"Until--I--go, then."

"Torp," said Dick, across the landing. He could hardly steady his voice.

"Come here a minute, old man. I'm in trouble"--

"Heaven send he'll listen to me!" There was something very like an oath from
Bessie's lips. She was afraid of Dick, and disappeared down the staircase in
panic, but it seemed an age before Torpenhow entered the studio. He went to the
mantelpiece, buried his head on his arms, and groaned like a wounded bull.

"What the devil right have you to interfere?" he said, at last.

"Who's interfering with which? Your own sense told you long ago you couldn't be
such a fool. It was a tough rack, St. Anthony, but you"re all right now."

"I oughtn't to have seen her moving about these rooms as if they belonged to
her. That's what upset me. It gives a lonely man a sort of hankering, doesn't
it?" said Torpenhow, piteously.

"Now you talk sense. It does. But, since you aren't in a condition to discuss
the disadvantages of double housekeeping, do you know what you're going to do?"

"I don't. I wish I did."

"You're going away for a season on a brilliant tour to regain tone. You"re
going to Brighton, or Scarborough, or Prawle Point, to see the ships go by. And
you're going at once. Isn't it odd? I'll take care of Binkie, but out you go
immediately. Never resist the devil. He holds the bank. Fly from him. Pack your
things and go."

"I believe you're right. Where shall I go?"

"And you call yourself a special correspondent! Pack first and inquire
afterwards."

An hour later Torpenhow was despatched into the night for a hansom.

"You'll probably think of some place to go to while you're moving," said Dick.
"On to Euston, to begin with, and--oh yes--get drunk tonight."

He returned to the studio, and lighted more candles, for he found the room very
dark.

"Oh, you Jezebel! you futile little Jezebel! Won't you hate me tomorrow!--
Binkie, come here."

Binkie turned over on his back on the hearth-rug, and Dick stirred him with a
meditative foot.

"I said she was not immoral. I was wrong. She said she could cook. That showed
premeditated sin. Oh, Binkie, if you are a man you will go to perdition; but if
you are a woman, and say that you can cook, you will go to a much worse place."

CHAPTER X

 What's you that follows at my side?--
 The foe that ye must fight, my lord.--
 That hirples swift as I can ride?--
 The shadow of the night, my lord.--
 Then wheel my horse against the foe!--
 He's down and overpast, my lord.

 Ye war against the sunset glow;
 The darkness gathers fast, my lord.
         ----The Fight of Heriot's Ford

"This is a cheerful life," said Dick, some days later. "Torp's away; Bessie
hates me; I can't get at the notion of the Melancolia; Maisie's letters are
scrappy; and I believe I have indigestion. What give a man pains across the
head and spots before his eyes, Binkie? Shall us take some liver pills?"

Dick had just gone through a lively scene with Bessie. She had for the fiftieth
time reproached him for sending Torpenhow away. She explained her enduring
hatred for Dick, and made it clear to him that she only sat for the sake of his
money. "And Mr. Torpenhow's ten times a better man than you," she concluded.

"He is. That's why he went away. I should have stayed and made love to you."

The girl sat with her chin on her hand, scowling. "To me! I'd like to catch
you! If I wasn't afraid 'o being hung I'd kill you. That's what I'd do. D'you
believe me?"

Dick smiled wearily. It is not pleasant to live in the company of a notion that
will not work out, a fox-terrier that cannot talk, and a woman who talks too
much. He would have answered, but at that moment there unrolled itself from one
corner of the studio a veil, as it were, of the flimsiest gauze. He rubbed his
eyes, but the gray haze would not go.

"This is disgraceful indigestion. Binkie, we will go to a medicine-man. We
can't have our eyes interfered with, for by these we get our bread; also
mutton-chop bones for little dogs."

The doctor was an affable local practitioner with white hair, and he said
nothing till Dick began to describe the gray film in the studio.

"We all want a little patching and repairing from time to time," he chirped.
"Like a ship, my dear sir,--exactly like a ship. Sometimes the hull is out of
order, and we consult the surgeon; sometimes the rigging, and then I advise;
sometimes the engines, and we go to the brain-specialist; sometimes the look-
out on the bridge is tired, and then we see an oculist. I should recommend you
to see an oculist. A little patching and repairing from time to time is all we
want. An oculist, by all means."

Dick sought an oculist,--the best in London. He was certain that the local
practitioner did not know anything about his trade, and more certain that
Maisie would laugh at him if he were forced to wear spectacles.

"I've neglected the warnings of my lord the stomach too long. Hence these spots
before the eyes, Binkie. I can see as well as I ever could."

As he entered the dark hall that led to the consulting-room a man cannoned
against him. Dick saw the face as it hurried out into the street.

"That's the writer-type. He has the same modelling of the forehead as Torp. He
looks very sick. Probably heard something he didn't like."

Even as he thought, a great fear came upon Dick, a fear that made him hold his
breath as he walked into the oculist's waiting room, with the heavy carved
furniture, the dark-green paper, and the sober-hued prints on the wall. He
recognised a reproduction of one of his own sketches.

Many people were waiting their turn before him. His eye was caught by a flaming
red-and-gold Christmas-carol book. Little children came to that eye-doctor, and
they needed large-type amusement.

"That's idolatrous bad Art," he said, drawing the book towards himself.

"From the anatomy of the angels, it has been made in Germany." He opened in
mechanically, and there leaped to his eyes a verse printed in red ink--

 The next good joy that Mary had,
 It was the joy of three,
 To see her good Son Jesus Christ
 Making the blind to see;
 Making the blind to see, good Lord,
 And happy we may be.
 Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost
 To all eternity!

Dick read and re-read the verse till his turn came, and the doctor was bending
above him seated in an arm-chair. The blaze of the gas-microscope in his eyes
made him wince. The doctor's hand touched the scar of the sword-cut on Dick's
head, and Dick explained briefly how he had come by it. When the flame was
removed, Dick saw the doctor's face, and the fear came upon him again. The
doctor wrapped himself in a mist of words. Dick caught allusions to "scar,"
"frontal bone," "optic nerve," "extreme caution," and the "avoidance of mental
anxiety."

"Verdict?" he said faintly. "My business is painting, and I daren't waste time.
What do you make of it?"

Again the whirl of words, but this time they conveyed a meaning.

"Can you give me anything to drink?"

Many sentences were pronounced in that darkened room, and the prisoners often
needed cheering. Dick found a glass of liqueur brandy in his hand.

"As far as I can gather," he said, coughing above the spirit, "you call it
decay of the optic nerve, or something, and therefore hopeless. What is my
time-limit, avoiding all strain and worry?"

"Perhaps one year."

"My God! And if I don't take care of myself?"

"I really could not say. One cannot ascertain the exact amount of injury
inflicted by the sword-cut. The scar is an old one, and--exposure to the strong
light of the desert, did you say?--with excessive application to fine work? I
really could not say?"

"I beg your pardon, but it has come without any warning. If you will let me,
I'll sit here for a minute, and then I'll go. You have been very good in
telling me the truth. Without any warning; without any warning. Thanks."

Dick went into the street, and was rapturously received by Binkie.

"We've got it very badly, little dog! Just as badly as we can get it. We'll go
to the Park to think it out."

They headed for a certain tree that Dick knew well, and they sat down to think,
because his legs were trembling under him and there was cold fear at the pit of
his stomach.

"How could it have come without any warning? It's as sudden as being shot. It's
the living death, Binkie. We're to be shut up in the dark in one year if we're
careful, and we shan't see anybody, and we shall never have anything we want,
not though we live to be a hundred!" Binkie wagged his tail joyously. "Binkie,
we must think. Let's see how it feels to be blind." Dick shut his eyes, and
flaming commas and Catherine-wheels floated inside the lids. Yet when he looked
across the Park the scope of his vision was not contracted. He could see
perfectly, until a procession of slow-wheeling fireworks defiled across his
eyeballs.

"Little dorglums, we aren't at all well. Let's go home. If only Torp were back,
now!"

But Torpenhow was in the south of England, inspecting dockyards in the company
of the Nilghai. His letters were brief and full of mystery.

Dick had never asked anybody to help him in his joys or his sorrows. He argued,
in the loneliness of his studio, henceforward to be decorated with a film of
gray gauze in one corner, that, if his fate were blindness, all the Torpenhows
in the world could not save him. "I can't call him off his trip to sit down and
sympathise with me. I must pull through this business alone," he said. He was
lying on the sofa, eating his moustache and wondering what the darkness of the
night would be like. Then came to his mind the memory of a quaint scene in the
Soudan. A soldier had been nearly hacked in two by a broad-bladed Arab spear.
For one instant the man felt no pain. Looking down, he saw that his life-blood
was going from him. The stupid bewilderment on his face was so intensely comic
that both Dick and Torpenhow, still panting and unstrung from a fight for life,
had roared with laughter, in which the man seemed as if he would join, but, as
his lips parted in a sheepish grin, the agony of death came upon him, and he
pitched grunting at their feet. Dick laughed again, remembering the horror. It
seemed so exactly like his own case.

"But I have a little more time allowed me," he said. He paced up and down the
room, quietly at first, but afterwards with the hurried feet of fear. It was as
though a black shadow stood at his elbow and urged him to go forward; and there
were only weaving circles and floating pin-dots before his eyes.

"We need to be calm, Binkie; we must be calm." He talked aloud for the sake of
distraction. "This isn't nice at all. What shall we do? We must do something.
Our time is short. I shouldn't have believed that this morning; but now things
are different. Binkie, where was Moses when the light went out?"

Binkie smiled from ear to ear, as a well-bred terrier should, but made no
suggestion.

"'Were there but world enough and time, This coyness, Binkie, were not crime. .
. . But at my back I always hear----'" He wiped his forehead, which was
unpleasantly damp. "What can I do? What can I do? I haven't any notions left,
and I can't think connectedly, but I must do something, or I shall go off my
head."

The hurried walk recommenced, Dick stopping every now and again to drag forth
long-neglected canvases and old note-books; for he turned to his work by
instinct, as a thing that could not fail. "You won't do, and you won't do," he
said, at each inspection. "No more soldiers. I couldn't paint 'em. Sudden death
comes home too nearly, and this is battle and murder for me."

The day was failing, and Dick thought for a moment that the twilight of the
blind had come upon him unaware. "Allah Almighty!" he cried despairingly, "help
me through the time of waiting, and I won't whine when my punishment comes.
What can I do now, before the light goes?"

There was no answer. Dick waited till he could regain some sort of control over
himself. His hands were shaking, and he prided himself on their steadiness; he
could feel that his lips were quivering, and the sweat was running down his
face. He was lashed by fear, driven forward by the desire to get to work at
once and accomplish something, and maddened by the refusal of his brain to do
more than repeat the news that he was about to go blind. "It's a humiliating
exhibition," he thought, "and I'm glad Torp isn't here to see. The doctor said
I was to avoid mental worry. Come here and let me pet you, Binkie."

The little dog yelped because Dick nearly squeezed the bark out of him.

Then he heard the man speaking in the twilight, and, doglike, understood that
his trouble stood off from him--"Allah is good, Binkie. Not quite so gentle as
we could wish, but we'll discuss that later. I think I see my way to it now.
All those studies of Bessie's head were nonsense, and they nearly brought your
master into a scrape. I hold the notion now as clear as crystal, 'the
Melancolia that transcends all wit.' There shall be Maisie in that head,
because I shall never get Maisie; and Bess, of course, because she knows all
about Melancolia, though she doesn't know she knows; and there shall be some
drawing in it, and it shall all end up with a laugh. That's for myself. Shall
she giggle or grin? No, she shall laugh right out of the canvas, and every man
and woman that ever had a sorrow of their own shall--what is it the poem says?-
-

'Understand the speech and feel a stir
 Of fellowship in all disastrous fight.'

"'In all disastrous fight'? That's better than painting the thing merely to
pique Maisie. I can do it now because I have it inside me. Binkie, I'm going to
hold you up by your tail. You're an omen. Come here."

Binkie swung head downward for a moment without speaking.

"Rather like holding a guinea-pig; but you're a brave little dog, and you don't
yelp when you're hung up. It is an omen."

Binkie went to his own chair, and as often as he looked saw Dick walking up and
down, rubbing his hands and chuckling. That night Dick wrote a letter to Maisie
full of the tenderest regard for her health, but saying very little about his
own, and dreamed of the Melancolia to be born. Not till morning did he remember
that something might happen to him in the future.

He fell to work, whistling softly, and was swallowed up in the clean, clear joy
of creation, which does not come to man too often, lest he should consider
himself the equal of his God, and so refuse to die at the appointed time. He
forgot Maisie, Torpenhow, and Binkie at his feet, but remembered to stir
Bessie, who needed very little stirring, into a tremendous rage, that he might
watch the smouldering lights in her eyes.

He threw himself without reservation into his work, and did not think of the
doom that was to overtake him, for he was possessed with his notion, and the
things of this world had no power upon him.

"You're pleased today," said Bessie.

Dick waved his mahl-stick in mystic circles and went to the sideboard for a
drink. In the evening, when the exaltation of the day had died down, he went to
the sideboard again, and after some visits became convinced that the eye-doctor
was a liar, since he could still see everything very clearly.

He was of opinion that he would even make a home for Maisie, and that whether
she liked it or not she should be his wife. The mood passed next morning, but
the sideboard and all upon it remained for his comfort.

Again he set to work, and his eyes troubled him with spots and dashes and blurs
till he had taken counsel with the sideboard, and the Melancolia both on the
canvas and in his own mind appeared lovelier than ever. There was a delightful
sense of irresponsibility upon him, such as they feel who walking among their
fellow-men know that the death-sentence of disease is upon them, and, seeing
that fear is but waste of the little time left, are riotously happy. The days
passed without event.

Bessie arrived punctually always, and, though her voice seemed to Dick to come
from a distance, her face was always very near. The Melancolia began to flame
on the canvas, in the likeness of a woman who had known all the sorrow in the
world and was laughing at it. It was true that the corners of the studio draped
themselves in gray film and retired into the darkness, that the spots in his
eyes and the pains across his head were very troublesome, and that Maisie's
letters were hard to read and harder still to answer. He could not tell her of
his trouble, and he could not laugh at her accounts of her own Melancolia which
was always going to be finished. But the furious days of toil and the nights of
wild dreams made amends for all, and the sideboard was his best friend on
earth.

Bessie was singularly dull. She used to shriek with rage when Dick stared at
her between half-closed eyes. Now she sulked, or watched him with disgust,
saying very little.

Torpenhow had been absent for six weeks. An incoherent note heralded his
return. "News! great news!" he wrote. "The Nilghai knows, and so does the
Keneu. We're all back on Thursday. Get lunch and clean your accoutrements."

Dick showed Bessie the letter, and she abused him for that he had ever sent
Torpenhow away and ruined her life.

"Well," said Dick, brutally, "you're better as you are, instead of making love
to some drunken beast in the street." He felt that he had rescued Torpenhow
from great temptation.

"I don't know if that's any worse than sitting to a drunken beast in a studio.
You haven't been sober for three weeks. You've been soaking the whole time; and
yet you pretend you're better than me!"

"What d'you mean?" said Dick.

"Mean! You'll see when Mr. Torpenhow comes back."

It was not long to wait. Torpenhow met Bessie on the staircase without a sign
of feeling. He had news that was more to him than many Bessies, and the Keneu
and the Nilghai were trampling behind him, calling for Dick.

"Drinking like a fish," Bessie whispered. "He's been at it for nearly a month."
She followed the men stealthily to hear judgment done.

They came into the studio, rejoicing, to be welcomed over effusively by a
drawn, lined, shrunken, haggard wreck,--unshaven, blue-white about the
nostrils, stooping in the shoulders, and peering under his eyebrows nervously.
The drink had been at work as steadily as Dick.

"Is this you?" said Torpenhow.

"All that's left of me. Sit down. Binkie's quite well, and I've been doing some
good work." He reeled where he stood.

"You've done some of the worst work you've ever done in your life. Man alive,
you're----"

Torpenhow turned to his companions appealingly, and they left the room to find
lunch elsewhere. Then he spoke; but, since the reproof of a friend is much too
sacred and intimate a thing to be printed, and since Torpenhow used figures and
metaphors which were unseemly, and contempt untranslatable, it will never be
known what was actually said to Dick, who blinked and winked and picked at his
hands. After a time the culprit began to feel the need of a little self-
respect. He was quite sure that he had not in any way departed from virtue, and
there were reasons, too, of which Torpenhow knew nothing. He would explain.

He rose, tried to straighten his shoulders, and spoke to the face he could
hardly see.

"You are right," he said. "But I am right, too. After you went away I had some
trouble with my eyes. So I went to an oculist, and he turned a gasogene--I mean
a gas-engine--into my eye. That was very long ago. He said, 'Scar on the head,-
-sword-cut and optic nerve.' Make a note of that. So I am going blind. I have
some work to do before I go blind, and I suppose that I must do it. I cannot
see much now, but I can see best when I am drunk. I did not know I was drunk
till I was told, but I must go on with my work. If you want to see it, there it
is." He pointed to the all but finished Melancolia and looked for applause.

Torpenhow said nothing, and Dick began to whimper feebly, for joy at seeing
Torpenhow again, for grief at misdeeds--if indeed they were misdeeds--that made
Torpenhow remote and unsympathetic, and for childish vanity hurt, since
Torpenhow had not given a word of praise to his wonderful picture.

Bessie looked through the keyhole after a long pause, and saw the two walking
up and down as usual, Torpenhow's hand on Dick"s shoulder.

Hereat she said something so improper that it shocked even Binkie, who was
dribbling patiently on the landing with the hope of seeing his master again.

CHAPTER XI

The lark will make her hymn to God,
The partridge call her brood,
While I forget the heath I trod,
The fields wherein I stood.

'Tis dule to know not night from morn,
But deeper dule to know
I can but hear the hunter's horn
That once I used to blow.
        --The Only Son

IT WAS the third day after Torpenhow's return, and his heart was heavy.

"Do you mean to tell me that you can't see to work without whiskey? It's
generally the other way about."

"Can a drunkard swear on his honour?" said Dick.

"Yes, if he has been as good a man as you."

"Then I give you my word of honour," said Dick, speaking hurriedly through
parched lips. "Old man, I can hardly see your face now. You've kept me sober
for two days,--if I ever was drunk,--and I've done no work. Don't keep me back
any more. I don't know when my eyes may give out. The spots and dots and the
pains and things are crowding worse than ever. I swear I can see all right when
I'm--when I'm moderately screwed, as you say. Give me three more sittings from
Bessie and all--the stuff I want, and the picture will be done. I can't kill
myself in three days. It only means a touch of D. T. at the worst."

"If I give you three days more will you promise me to stop work and--the other
thing, whether the picture's finished or not?"

"I can't. You don't know what that picture means to me. But surely you could
get the Nilghai to help you, and knock me down and tie me up. I shouldn't fight
for the whiskey, but I should for the work."

"Go on, then. I give you three days; but you're nearly breaking my heart."

Dick returned to his work, toiling as one possessed; and the yellow devil of
whiskey stood by him and chased away the spots in his eyes. The Melancolia was
nearly finished, and was all or nearly all that he had hoped she would be. Dick
jested with Bessie, who reminded him that he was "a drunken beast"; but the
reproof did not move him.

"You can't understand, Bess. We are in sight of land now, and soon we shall lie
back and think about what we've done. I'll give you three months' pay when the
picture's finished, and next time I have any more work in hand--but that
doesn't matter. Won't three months' pay make you hate me less?"

"No, it won't! I hate you, and I'll go on hating you. Mr. Torpenhow won't speak
to me any more. He's always looking at maps."

Bessie did not say that she had again laid siege to Torpenhow, or that at the
end of our passionate pleading he had picked her up, given her a kiss, and put
her outside the door with the recommendation not to be a little fool. He spent
most of his time in the company of the Nilghai, and their talk was of war in
the near future, the hiring of transports, and secret preparations among the
dockyards. He did not wish to see Dick till the picture was finished.

"He's doing first-class work," he said to the Nilghai, "and it's quite out of
his regular line. But, for the matter of that, so's his infernal soaking."

"Never mind. Leave him alone. When he has come to his senses again we'll carry
him off from this place and let him breathe clean air. Poor Dick! I don't envy
you, Torp, when his eyes fail."

"Yes, it will be a case of 'God help the man who's chained to our Davie.' The
worst is that we don't know when it will happen, and I believe the uncertainty
and the waiting have sent Dick to the whiskey more than anything else."

"How the Arab who cut his head open would grin if he knew!"

"He's at perfect liberty to grin if he can. He's dead. That's poor consolation
now."

In the afternoon of the third day Torpenhow heard Dick calling for him.

"All finished!" he shouted. "I've done it! Come in! Isn't she a beauty? Isn't
she a darling? I've been down to hell to get her; but isn't she worth it?"

Torpenhow looked at the head of a woman who laughed,--a full-lipped, hollow-
eyed woman who laughed from out of the canvas as Dick had intended she would.

"Who taught you how to do it?" said Torpenhow. "The touch and notion have
nothing to do with your regular work. What a face it is! What eyes, and what
insolence!" Unconsciously he threw back his head and laughed with her. "She's
seen the game played out,--I don't think she had a good time of it,--and now
she doesn't care. Isn't that the idea?"

"Exactly."

"Where did you get the mouth and chin from? They don't belong to Bess."

"They're--some one else's. But isn't it good? Isn't it thundering good? Wasn't
it worth the whiskey? I did it. Alone I did it, and it's the best I can do." He
drew his breath sharply, and whispered, "Just God! what could I not do ten
years hence, if I can do this now!--By the way, what do you think of it, Bess?"

The girl was biting her lips. She loathed Torpenhow because he had taken no
notice of her.

"I think it's just the horridest, beastliest thing I ever saw," she answered,
and turned away.

"More than you will be of that way of thinking, young woman.--Dick, there's a
sort of murderous, viperine suggestion in the poise of the head that I don't
understand," said Torpenhow.

That's trick-work," said Dick, chuckling with delight at being completely
understood. "I couldn't resist one little bit of sheer swagger. It's a French
trick, and you wouldn't understand; but it's got at by slewing round the head a
trifle, and a tiny, tiny foreshortening of one side of the face from the angle
of the chin to the top of the left ear. That, and deepening the shadow under
the lobe of the ear. It was flagrant trick-work; but, having the notion fixed,
I felt entitled to play with it,--Oh, you beauty!"

"Amen! She is a beauty. I can feel it."

"So will every man who has any sorrow of his own," said Dick, slapping his
thigh. "He shall see his trouble there, and, by the Lord Harry, just when he's
feeling properly sorry for himself he shall throw back his head and laugh,--as
she is laughing. I've put the life of my heart and the light of my eyes into
her, and I don't care what comes. . . . I'm tired,--awfully tired. I think I'll
get to sleep. Take away the whiskey, it has served its turn, and give Bessie
thirty-six quid, and three over for luck. Cover the picture."

He dropped asleep in the long chair, hid face white and haggard, almost before
he had finished the sentence. Bessie tried to take Torpenhow"s hand. "Aren't
you never going to speak to me any more?" she said; but Torpenhow was looking
at Dick.

"What a stock of vanity the man has! I'll take him in hand tomorrow and make
much of him. He deserves it.--Eh! what was that, Bess?"

"Nothing. I'll put things tidy here a little, and then I'll go. You couldn't
give the that three months" pay now, could you? He said you were to."

Torpenhow gave her a check and went to his own rooms. Bessie faithfully tidied
up the studio, set the door ajar for flight, emptied half a bottle of
turpentine on a duster, and began to scrub the face of the Melancolia
viciously. The paint did not smudge quickly enough. She took a palette-knife
and scraped, following each stroke with the wet duster. In five minutes the
picture was a formless, scarred muddle of colours. She threw the paint-stained
duster into the studio stove, stuck out her tongue at the sleeper, and
whispered, "Bilked!" as she turned to run down the staircase. She would never
see Torpenhow any more, but she had at least done harm to the man who had come
between her and her desire and who used to make fun of her. Cashing the check
was the very cream of the jest to Bessie. Then the little privateer sailed
across the Thames, to be swallowed up in the gray wilderness of South-the-
Water.

Dick slept till late in the evening, when Torpenhow dragged him off to bed. His
eyes were as bright as his voice was hoarse. "Let's have another look at the
picture," he said, insistently as a child.

"You--go--to--bed," said Torpenhow. "You aren't at all well, though you mayn't
know it. You're as jumpy as a cat."

"I reform tomorrow. Good night."

As he repassed through the studio, Torpenhow lifted the cloth above the
picture, and almost betrayed himself by outcries: "Wiped out!--scraped out and
turped out! He's on the verge of jumps as it is. That's Bess,--the little
fiend! Only a woman could have done that!--with the ink not dry on the check,
too! Dick will be raving mad tomorrow. It was all my fault for trying to help
gutter-devils. Oh, my poor Dick, the Lord is hitting you very hard!"

Dick could not sleep that night, partly for pure joy, and partly because the
well-known Catherine-wheels inside his eyes had given place to crackling
volcanoes of many-coloured fire. "Spout away," he said aloud.

"I've done my work, and now you can do what you please." He lay still, staring
at the ceiling, the long-pent-up delirium of drink in his veins, his brain on
fire with racing thoughts that would not stay to be considered, and his hands
crisped and dry. He had just discovered that he was painting the face of the
Melancolia on a revolving dome ribbed with millions of lights, and that all his
wondrous thoughts stood embodied hundreds of feet below his tiny swinging
plank, shouting together in his honour, when something cracked inside his
temples like an overstrained bowstring, the glittering dome broke inward, and
he was alone in the thick night.

"I'll go to sleep. The room's very dark. Let's light a lamp and see how the
Melancolia looks. There ought to have been a moon."

It was then that Torpenhow heard his name called by a voice that he did not
know,--in the rattling accents of deadly fear.

"He's looked at the picture," was his first thought, as he hurried into the
bedroom and found Dick sitting up and beating the air with his hands.

"Torp! Torp! where are you? For pity's sake, come to me!"

"What's the matter?"

Dick clutched at his shoulder. "Matter! I've been lying here for hours in the
dark, and you never heard me. Torp, old man, don't go away. I'm all in the
dark. In the dark, I tell you!"

Torpenhow held the candle within a foot of Dick's eyes, but there was no light
in those eyes. He lit the gas, and Dick heard the flame catch. The grip of his
fingers on Torpenhow's shoulder made Torpenhow wince.

"Don't leave me. You wouldn't leave me alone now, would you? I  can't see.
D'you understand? It's black,--quite black,--and I feel as if I was falling
through it all."

"Steady does it." Torpenhow put his arm round Dick and began to rock him gently
to and fro.

"That's good. Now don't talk. If I keep very quiet for a while, this darkness
will lift. It seems just on the point of breaking. H'sh!" Dick knit his brows
and stared desperately in front of him. The night air was chilling Torpenhow's
toes.

"Can you stay like that a minute?" he said. "I'll get my dressing-gown and some
slippers."

Dick clutched the bed-head with both hands and waited for the darkness to clear
away. "What a time you've been!" he cried, when Torpenhow returned. "It's as
black as ever. What are you banging about in the door-way?"

"Long chair,--horse-blanket,--pillow. Going to sleep by you. Lie down now;
you'll be better in the morning."

"I shan't!" The voice rose to a wail. "My God! I'm blind! I'm blind, and the
darkness will never go away." He made as if to leap from the bed, but
Torpenhow's arms were round him, and Torpenhow's chin was on his shoulder, and
his breath was squeezed out of him. He could only gasp, "Blind!" and wriggle
feebly.

"Steady, Dickie, steady!" said the deep voice in his ear, and the grip
tightened. "Bite on the bullet, old man, and don't let them think you"re
afraid." The grip could draw no closer. Both men were breathing heavily.

Dick threw his head from side to side and groaned.

"Let me go," he panted. "You're cracking my ribs. We--we mustn't let them think
we're afraid, must we,--all the powers of darkness and that lot?"

"Lie down. It's all over now."

"Yes," said Dick, obediently. "But would you mind letting me hold your hand? I
feel as if I wanted something to hold on to. One drops through the dark so."

Torpenhow thrust out a large and hairy paw from the long chair. Dick clutched
it tightly, and in half an hour had fallen asleep. Torpenhow withdrew his hand,
and, stooping over Dick, kissed him lightly on the forehead, as men do
sometimes kiss a wounded comrade in the hour of death, to ease his departure.

In the gray dawn Torpenhow heard Dick talking to himself. He was adrift on the
shoreless tides of delirium, speaking very quickly--"It's a pity,--a great
pity; but it's helped, and it must be eaten, Master George. Sufficient unto the
day is the blindness thereof, and, further, putting aside all Melancolias and
false humours, it is of obvious notoriety--such as mine was--that the queen can
do no wrong. Torp doesn't know that. I'll tell him when we're a little farther
into the desert.

"What a bungle those boatmen are making of the steamer-ropes! They'll have that
four-inch hawser chafed through in a minute. I told you so--there she goes!
White foam on green water, and the steamer slewing round. How good that looks!
I'll sketch it. No, I can't. I'm afflicted with ophthalmia. That was one of the
ten plagues of Egypt, and it extends up the Nile in the shape of cataract. Ha!
that's a joke, Torp. Laugh, you graven image, and stand clear of the hawser. .
. . It'll knock you into the water and make your dress all dirty, Maisie dear."

"Oh!" said Torpenhow. "This happened before. That night on the river."

"She'll be sure to say it's my fault if you get muddy, and you're quite near
enough to the breakwater. Maisie, that's not fair. Ah! I knew you'd miss.

Low and to the left, dear. But you've no conviction. Don't be angry, darling.
I'd cut my hand off if it would give you anything more than obstinacy. My right
hand, if it would serve."

"Now we mustn't listen. Here's an island shouting across seas of
misunderstanding with a vengeance. But it's shouting truth, I fancy," said
Torpenhow.

The babble continued. It all bore upon Maisie. Sometimes Dick lectured at
length on his craft, then he cursed himself for his folly in being enslaved. He
pleaded to Maisie for a kiss--only one kiss--before she went away, and called
to her to come back from Vitry-sur-Marne, if she would; but through all his
ravings he bade heaven and earth witness that the queen could do no wrong.

Torpenhow listened attentively, and learned every detail of Dick's life that
had been hidden from him. For three days Dick raved through the past, and then
a natural sleep. "What a strain he has been running under, poor chap!" said
Torpenhow. "Dick, of all men, handing himself over like a dog! And I was
lecturing him on arrogance! I ought to have known that it was no use to judge a
man. But I did it. What a demon that girl must be! Dick's given her his life,--
confound him!--and she's given him one kiss apparently."

"Torp," said Dick, from the bed, "go out for a walk. You've been here too long.
I'll get up. Hi! This is annoying. I can't dress myself. Oh, it's too absurd!"

Torpenhow helped him into his clothes and led him to the big chair in the
studio. He sat quietly waiting under strained nerves for the darkness to lift.
It did not lift that day, nor the next. Dick adventured on a voyage round the
walls. He hit his shins against the stove, and this suggested to him that it
would be better to crawl on all fours, one hand in front of him. Torpenhow
found him on the floor.

"I'm trying to get the geography of my new possessions," said he. "D"you
remember that nigger you gouged in the square? Pity you didn't keep the odd
eye. It would have been useful. Any letters for me? Give me all the ones in fat
gray envelopes with a sort of crown thing outside. They're of no importance."

Torpenhow gave him a letter with a black M. on the envelope flap. Dick put it
into his pocket. There was nothing in it that Torpenhow might not have read,
but it belonged to himself and to Maisie, who would never belong to him.

"When she finds that I don't write, she'll stop writing. It's better so. I
couldn't be any use to her now," Dick argued, and the tempter suggested that he
should make known his condition. Every nerve in him revolted. "I have fallen
low enough already. I'm not going to beg for pity. Besides, it would be cruel
to her." He strove to put Maisie out of his thoughts; but the blind have many
opportunities for thinking, and as the tides of his strength came back to him
in the long employless days of dead darkness, Dick's soul was troubled to the
core. Another letter, and another, came from Maisie. Then there was silence,
and Dick sat by the window, the pulse of summer in the air, and pictured her
being won by another man, stronger than himself. His imagination, the keener
for the dark background it worked against, spared him no single detail that
might send him raging up and down the studio, to stumble over the stove that
seemed to be in four places at once. Worst of all, tobacco would not taste in
the darkness. The arrogance of the man had disappeared, and in its place were
settled despair that Torpenhow knew, and blind passion that Dick confided to
his pillow at night. The intervals between the paroxysms were filled with
intolerable waiting and the weight of intolerable darkness.

"Come out into the Park," said Torpenhow. "You haven't stirred out since the
beginning of things."

"What's the use? There's no movement in the dark; and, besides,"--he paused
irresolutely at the head of the stairs,--"something will run over me."

"Not if I'm with you. Proceed gingerly."

The roar of the streets filled Dick with nervous terror, and he clung to
Torpenhow's arm. "Fancy having to feel for a gutter with your foot!" he said
petulantly, as he turned into the Park. "Let's curse God and die."

"Sentries are forbidden to pay unauthorised compliments. By Jove, there are the
Guards!"

Dick's figure straightened. "Let's get near "em. Let's go in and look. Let"s
get on the grass and run. I can smell the trees."

"Mind the low railing. That's all right!" Torpenhow kicked out a tuft of grass
with his heel. "Smell that," he said. "Isn't it good?" Dick sniffed
luxuriously. "Now pick up your feet and run." They approached as near to the
regiment as was possible. The clank of bayonets being unfixed made Dick's
nostrils quiver.

"Let's get nearer. They're in column, aren't they?"

"Yes. How did you know?"

"Felt it. Oh, my men!--my beautiful men!" He edged forward as though he could
see. "I could draw those chaps once. Who'll draw 'em now?"

"They'll move off in a minute. Don't jump when the band begins."

"Huh! I'm not a new charger. It's the silences that hurt. Nearer, Torp!--
nearer! Oh, my God, what wouldn't I give to see 'em for a minute!--one half-
minute!"

He could hear the armed life almost within reach of him, could hear the slings
tighten across the bandsman's chest as he heaved the big drum from the ground.

"Sticks crossed above his head," whispered Torpenhow.

"I know. I know! Who should know if I don't? H'sh!"

The drum-sticks fell with a boom, and the men swung forward to the crash of the
band. Dick felt the wind of the massed movement in his face, heard the
maddening tramp of feet and the friction of the pouches on the belts. The big
drum pounded out the tune. It was a music-hall refrain that made a perfect
quickstep--

"He must be a man of decent height,
He must be a man of weight,
He must come home on a Saturday night
In a thoroughly sober state;
He must know how to love me,
And he must know how to kiss;
And if he's enough to keep us both
I can't refuse him bliss."

"What's the matter?" said Torpenhow, as he saw Dick's head fall when the last
of the regiment had departed.

"Nothing. I feel a little bit out of the running,--that's all. Torp, take me
back. Why did you bring me out?"

CHAPTER XII

There were three friends that buried the fourth,
 The mould in his mouth and the dust in his eyes
And they went south and east, and north,--
 The strong man fights, but the sick man dies.

There were three friends that spoke of the dead,--
 The strong man fights, but the sick man dies.--
"And would he were with us now," they said,
 "The sun in our face and the wind in our eyes."
                   --Ballad.

The Nilghai was angry with Torpenhow. Dick had been sent to bed,--blind men are
ever under the orders of those who can see,--and since he had returned from the
Park had fluently sworn at Torpenhow because he was alive, and all the world
because it was alive and could see, while he, Dick, was dead in the death of
the blind, who, at the best, are only burdens upon their associates. Torpenhow
had said something about a Mrs. Gummidge, and Dick had retired in a black fury
to handle and re-handle three unopened letters from Maisie.

The Nilghai, fat, burly, and aggressive, was in Torpenhow's rooms.

Behind him sat the Keneu, the Great War Eagle, and between them lay a large map
embellished with black-and-white-headed pins.

"I was wrong about the Balkans," said the Nilghai. "But I'm not wrong about
this business. The whole of our work in the Southern Soudan must be done over
again. The public doesn't care, of course, but the government does, and they
are making their arrangements quietly. You know that as well as I do."

"I remember how the people cursed us when our troops withdrew from Omdurman. It
was bound to crop up sooner or later. But I can't go," said Torpenhow. He
pointed through the open door; it was a hot night. "Can you blame me?"

The Keneu purred above his pipe like a large and very happy cat--"Don't blame
you in the least. It's uncommonly good of you, and all the rest of it, but
every man--even you, Torp--must consider his work. I know it sounds brutal, but
Dick's out of the race,--down,--gastados expended, finished, done for. He has a
little money of his own. He won't starve, and you can't pull out of your slide
for his sake. Think of your own reputation."

"Dick's was five times bigger than mine and yours put together."

"That was because he signed his name to everything he did. It's all ended now.
You must hold yourself in readiness to move out. You can command your own
prices, and you do better work than any three of us."

"Don't tell me how tempting it is. I'll stay here to look after Dick for a
while. He's as cheerful as a bear with a sore head, but I think he likes to
have me near him."

The Nilghai said something uncomplimentary about soft-headed fools who throw
away their careers for other fools. Torpenhow flushed angrily. The constant
strain of attendance on Dick had worn his nerves thin.

"There remains a third fate," said the Keneu, thoughtfully. "Consider this, and
be not larger fools than necessary. Dick is--or rather was--an able-bodied man
of moderate attractions and a certain amount of audacity."

"Oho!" said the Nilghai, who remembered an affair at Cairo. "I begin to see,--
Torp, I'm sorry."

Torpenhow nodded forgiveness: "You were more sorry when he cut you out,
though.--Go on, Keneu."

"I've often thought, when I've seen men die out in the desert, that if the news
could be sent through the world, and the means of transport were quick enough,
there would be one woman at least at each man's bedside."

"There would be some mighty quaint revelations. Let us be grateful things are
as they are," said the Nilghai.

"Let us rather reverently consider whether Torp's three-cornered ministrations
are exactly what Dick needs just now.--What do you think yourself, Torp?"

"I know they aren't. But what can I do?"

"Lay the matter before the board. We are all Dick's friends here. You"ve been
most in his life."

"But I picked it up when he was off his head."

"The greater chance of its being true. I thought we should arrive. Who is she?"

Then Torpenhow told a tale in plain words, as a special correspondent who knows
how to make a verbal precis should tell it. The men listened without
interruption.

"Is it possible that a man can come back across the years to his calf-love?"

said the Keneu. "Is it possible?"

"I give the facts. He says nothing about it now, but he sits fumbling three
letters from her when he thinks I'm not looking. What am I to do?"

"Speak to him," said the Nilghai.

"Oh yes! Write to her,--I don't know her full name, remember,--and ask her to
accept him out of pity. I believe you once told Dick you were sorry for him,
Nilghai. You remember what happened, eh? Go into the bedroom and suggest full
confession and an appeal to this Maisie girl, whoever she is. I honestly
believe he'd try to kill you; and the blindness has made him rather muscular."

"Torpenhow's course is perfectly clear," said the Keneu. "He will go to Vitry-
sur-Marne, which is on the Bezieres-Landes Railway,--single track from Tourgas.
The Prussians shelled it out in '70 because there was a poplar on the top of a
hill eighteen hundred yards from the church spire. There's a squadron of
cavalry quartered there,--or ought to be. Where this studio Torp spoke about
may be I cannot tell. That is Torp's business. I have given him his route. He
will dispassionately explain the situation to the girl, and she will come back
to Dick,--the more especially because, to use Dick's words, 'there is nothing
but her damned obstinacy to keep them apart.'"

"And they have four hundred and twenty pounds a year between 'em."

Dick never lost his head for figures, even in his delirium. You haven't the
shadow of an excuse for not going," said the Nilghai.

Torpenhow looked very uncomfortable. "But it's absurd and impossible. I can't
drag her back by the hair."

"Our business--the business for which we draw our money--is to do absurd and
impossible things,--generally with no reason whatever except to amuse the
public. Here we have a reason. The rest doesn't matter. I shall share these
rooms with the Nilghai till Torpenhow returns. There will be a batch of
unbridled 'specials' coming to town in a little while, and these will serve as
their headquarters. Another reason for sending Torpenhow away. Thus Providence
helps those who help others, and"--here the Keneu dropped his measured speech--
"we can't have you tied by the leg to Dick when the trouble begins. It's your
only chance of getting away; and Dick will be grateful."

"He will,--worse luck! I can but go and try. I can't conceive a woman in her
senses refusing Dick."

"Talk that out with the girl. I have seen you wheedle an angry Mahdieh woman
into giving you dates. This won't be a tithe as difficult. You had better not
be here tomorrow afternoon, because the Nilghai and I will be in possession. It
is an order. Obey."

"Dick," said Torpenhow, next morning, "can I do anything for you?"

"No! Leave me alone. How often must I remind you that I'm blind?"

"Nothing I could go for to fetch for to carry for to bring?"

"No. Take those infernal creaking boots of yours away."

"Poor chap!" said Torpenhow to himself. "I must have been sitting on his nerves
lately. He wants a lighter step." Then, aloud, "Very well. Since you're so
independent, I'm going off for four or five days. Say goodbye at least. The
housekeeper will look after you, and Keneu has my rooms."

Dick's face fell. "You won't be longer than a week at the outside? I know I'm
touched in the temper, but I can't get on without you."

"Can't you? You'll have to do without me in a little time, and you'll be glad
I'm gone."

Dick felt his way back to the big chair, and wondered what these things might
mean. He did not wish to be tended by the housekeeper, and yet Torpenhow's
constant tenderness jarred on him. He did not exactly know what he wanted. The
darkness would not lift, and Maisie"s unopened letters felt worn and old from
much handling. He could never read them for himself as long as life endured;
but Maisie might have sent him some fresh ones to play with. The Nilghai
entered with a gift,--a piece of red modelling-wax. He fancied that Dick might
find interest in using his hands. Dick poked and patted the stuff for a few
minutes, and, "Is it like anything in the world?" he said drearily. "Take it
away. I may get the touch of the blind in fifty years. Do you know where
Torpenhow has gone?"

The Nilghai knew nothing. "We're staying in his rooms till he comes back. Can
we do anything for you?"

"I'd like to be left alone, please. Don't think I'm ungrateful; but I'm best
alone."

The Nilghai chuckled, and Dick resumed his drowsy brooding and sullen rebellion
against fate. He had long since ceased to think about the work he had done in
the old days, and the desire to do more work had departed from him. He was
exceedingly sorry for himself, and the completeness of his tender grief soothed
him. But his soul and his body cried for Maisie--Maisie who would understand.
His mind pointed out that Maisie, having her own work to do, would not care.
His experience had taught him that when money was exhausted women went away,
and that when a man was knocked out of the race the others trampled on him.
"Then at the least," said Dick, in reply, "she could use me as I used Binat,--
for some sort of a study. I wouldn't ask more than to be near her again, even
though I knew that another man was making love to her. Ugh! what a dog I am!"

A voice on the staircase began to sing joyfully--

"When we go--go--go away from here,
Our creditors will weep and they will wail,
Our absence much regretting when they find that we've been getting
Out of England by next Tuesday's Indian mail."

Following the trampling of feet, slamming of Torpenhow's door, and the sound of
voices in strenuous debate, some one squeaked, "And see, you good fellows, I
have found a new water-bottle--firs'-class patent--eh, how you say? Open
himself inside out."

Dick sprang to his feet. He knew the voice well. "That's Cassavetti, come back
from the Continent. Now I know why Torp went away. There's a row somewhere,
and--I'm out of it!"

The Nilghai commanded silence in vain. "That's for my sake," Dick said
bitterly. "The birds are getting ready to fly, and they wouldn't tell me. I can
hear Morten-Sutherland and Mackaye. Half the War Correspondents in London are
there;--and I'm out of it."

He stumbled across the landing and plunged into Torpenhow"s room. He could feel
that it was full of men. "Where's the trouble?" said he. "In the Balkans at
last? Why didn't some one tell me?"

"We thought you wouldn't be interested," said the Nilghai, shamefacedly.

"It's in the Soudan, as usual."

"You lucky dogs! Let me sit here while you talk. I shan't be a skeleton at the
feast.--Cassavetti, where are you? Your English is as bad as ever."

Dick was led into a chair. He heard the rustle of the maps, and the talk swept
forward, carrying him with it. Everybody spoke at once, discussing press
censorships, railway-routes, transport, water-supply, the capacities of
generals,--these in language that would have horrified a trusting public,--
ranting, asserting, denouncing, and laughing at the top of their voices. There
was the glorious certainty of war in the Soudan at any moment. The Nilghai said
so, and it was well to be in readiness. The Keneu had telegraphed to Cairo for
horses; Cassavetti had stolen a perfectly inaccurate list of troops that would
be ordered forward, and was reading it out amid profane interruptions, and the
Keneu introduced to Dick some man unknown who would be employed as war artist
by the Central Southern Syndicate. "It's his first outing," said the Keneu.
"Give him some tips--about riding camels."

"Oh, those camels!" groaned Cassavetti. "I shall learn to ride him again, and
now I am so much all soft! Listen, you good fellows. I know your military
arrangement very well. There will go the Royal Argalshire Sutherlanders. So it
was read to me upon best authority."

A roar of laughter interrupted him.

"Sit down," said the Nilghai. "The lists aren't even made out in the War
Office."

"Will there be any force at Suakin?" said a voice.

Then the outcries redoubled, and grew mixed, thus: "How many Egyptian troops
will they use?--God help the Fellaheen!--There's a railway in Plumstead marshes
doing duty as a fives-court.--We shall have the Suakin-Berber line built at
last.--Canadian voyageurs are too careful. Give me a half-drunk Krooman in a
whale-boat.--Who commands the Desert column?--No, they never blew up the big
rock in the Ghineh bend. We shall have to be hauled up, as usual.--Somebody
tell me if there's an Indian contingent, or I'll break everybody's head.--Don't
tear the map in two.--It's a war of occupation, I tell you, to connect with the
African companies in the South.--There's Guinea-worm in most of the wells on
that route." Then the Nilghai, despairing of peace, bellowed like a fog-horn
and beat upon the table with both hands.

"But what becomes of Torpenhow?" said Dick, in the silence that followed.

"Torp's in abeyance just now. He's off love-making somewhere, I suppose," said
the Nilghai.

"He said he was going to stay at home," said the Keneu.

"Is he?" said Dick, with an oath. "He won't. I'm not much good now, but if you
and the Nilghai hold him down I'll engage to trample on him till he sees
reason. He'll stay behind, indeed! He's the best of you all. There'll be some
tough work by Omdurman. We shall come there to stay, this time.

"But I forgot. I wish I were going with you."

"So do we all, Dickie," said the Keneu.

"And I most of all," said the new artist of the Central Southern Syndicate.

"Could you tell me----"

"I'll give you one piece of advice," Dick answered, moving towards the door.
"If you happen to be cut over the head in a scrimmage, don't guard. Tell the
man to go on cutting. You'll find it cheapest in the end. Thanks for letting me
look in."

"There's grit in Dick," said the Nilghai, an hour later, when the room was
emptied of all save the Keneu.

"It was the sacred call of the war-trumpet. Did you notice how he answered to
it? Poor fellow! Let's look at him," said the Keneu.

The excitement of the talk had died away. Dick was sitting by the studio table,
with his head on his arms, when the men came in. He did not change his
position.

"It hurts," he moaned. "God forgive me, but it hurts cruelly; and yet, y'know,
the world has a knack of spinning round all by itself. Shall I see Torp before
he goes?"

"Oh, yes. You'll see him," said the Nilghai.

CHAPTER XIII

The sun went down an hour ago,
I wonder if I face towards home;
If I lost my way in the light of day
How shall I find it now night is come?
              --Old Song

"Maisie, come to bed."

"It's so hot I can't sleep. Don't worry."

Maisie put her elbows on the window-sill and looked at the moonlight on the
straight, poplar-flanked road. Summer had come upon Vitry-sur-Marne and parched
it to the bone. The grass was dry-burnt in the meadows, the clay by the bank of
the river was caked to brick, the roadside flowers were long since dead, and
the roses in the garden hung withered on their stalks. The heat in the little
low bedroom under the eaves was almost intolerable. The very moonlight on the
wall of Kami's studio across the road seemed to make the night hotter, and the
shadow of the big bell-handle by the closed gate cast a bar of inky black that
caught Maisie's eye and annoyed her.

"Horrid thing! It should be all white," she murmured. "And the gate isn't in
the middle of the wall, either. I never noticed that before."

Maisie was hard to please at that hour. First, the heat of the past few weeks
had worn her down; secondly, her work, and particularly the study of a female
head intended to represent the Melancolia and not finished in time for the
Salon, was unsatisfactory; thirdly, Kami had said as much two days before;
fourthly,--but so completely fourthly that it was hardly worth thinking about,-
-Dick, her property, had not written to her for more than six weeks. She was
angry with the heat, with Kami, and with her work, but she was exceedingly
angry with Dick.

She had written to him three times,--each time proposing a fresh treatment of
her Melancolia. Dick had taken no notice of these communications. She had
resolved to write no more. When she returned to England in the autumn--for her
pride's sake she could not return earlier--she would speak to him. She missed
the Sunday afternoon conferences more than she cared to admit. All that Kami
said was, "Continuez, mademoiselle, continuez toujours," and he had been
repeating the wearisome counsel through the hot summer, exactly like a cicada,-
-an old gray cicada in a black alpaca coat, white trousers, and a huge felt
hat.

But Dick had tramped masterfully up and down her little studio north of the
cool green London park, and had said things ten times worse than continuez,
before he snatched the brush out of her hand and showed her where the error
lay. His last letter, Maisie remembered, contained some trivial advice about
not sketching in the sun or drinking water at wayside farmhouses; and he had
said that not once, but three times,--as if he did not know that Maisie could
take care of herself.

But what was he doing, that he could not trouble to write? A murmur of voices
in the road made her lean from the window. A cavalryman of the little garrison
in the town was talking to Kami's cook. The moonlight glittered on the scabbard
of his sabre, which he was holding in his hand lest it should clank
inopportunely. The cook's cap cast deep shadows on her face, which was close to
the conscript's. He slid his arm round her waist, and there followed the sound
of a kiss.

"Faugh!" said Maisie, stepping back.

"What's that?" said the red-haired girl, who was tossing uneasily outside her
bed.

"Only a conscript kissing the cook," said Maisie.

"They've gone away now." She leaned out of the window again, and put a shawl
over her nightgown to guard against chills. There was a very small night-breeze
abroad, and a sun-baked rose below nodded its head as one who knew unutterable
secrets. Was it possible that Dick should turn his thoughts from her work and
his own and descend to the degradation of Suzanne and the conscript? He could
not! The rose nodded its head and one leaf therewith. It looked like a naughty
little devil scratching its ear.

Dick could not, "because," thought Maisie, "he is mine,--mine,--mine. He said
he was. I'm sure I don't care what he does. It will only spoil his work if he
does; and it will spoil mine too."

The rose continued to nod in the futile way peculiar to flowers. There was no
earthly reason why Dick should not disport himself as he chose, except that he
was called by Providence, which was Maisie, to assist Maisie in her work. And
her work was the preparation of pictures that went sometimes to English
provincial exhibitions, as the notices in the scrap-book proved, and that were
invariably rejected by the Salon when Kami was plagued into allowing her to
send them up. Her work in the future, it seemed, would be the preparation of
pictures on exactly similar lines which would be rejected in exactly the same
way----The red-haired girl threshed distressfully across the sheets. "It's too
hot to sleep," she moaned; and the interruption jarred.

Exactly the same way. Then she would divide her years between the little studio
in England and Kami's big studio at Vitry-sur-Marne. No, she would go to
another master, who should force her into the success that was her right, if
patient toil and desperate endeavour gave one a right to anything. Dick had
told her that he had worked ten years to understand his craft. She had worked
ten years, and ten years were nothing. Dick had said that ten years were
nothing,--but that was in regard to herself only. He had said--this very man
who could not find time to write--that he would wait ten years for her, and
that she was bound to come back to him sooner or later. He had said this in the
absurd letter about sunstroke and diphtheria; and then he had stopped writing.
He was wandering up and down moonlit streets, kissing cooks. She would like to
lecture him now,--not in her nightgown, of course, but properly dressed,
severely and from a height. Yet if he was kissing other girls he certainly
would not care whether she lecture him or not. He would laugh at her. Very
good.

She would go back to her studio and prepare pictures that went, etc., etc.

The mill-wheel of thought swung round slowly, that no section of it might be
slurred over, and the red-haired girl tossed and turned behind her.

Maisie put her chin in her hands and decided that there could be no doubt
whatever of the villainy of Dick. To justify herself, she began, unwomanly, to
weigh the evidence. There was a boy, and he had said he loved her. And he
kissed her,--kissed her on the cheek,--by a yellow sea-poppy that nodded its
head exactly like the maddening dry rose in the garden. Then there was an
interval, and men had told her that they loved her--just when she was busiest
with her work. Then the boy came back, and at their very second meeting had
told her that he loved her. Then he had----But there was no end to the things
he had done. He had given her his time and his powers. He had spoken to her of
Art, housekeeping, technique, teacups, the abuse of pickles as a stimulant,--
that was rude,--sable hair-brushes,--he had given her the best in her stock,--
she used them daily; he had given her advice that she profited by, and now and
again--a look. Such a look! The look of a beaten hound waiting for the word to
crawl to his mistress's feet. In return she had given him nothing whatever,
except--here she brushed her mouth against the open-work sleeve of her
nightgown--the privilege of kissing her once. And on the mouth, too.
Disgraceful! Was that not enough, and more than enough? and if it was not, had
he not cancelled the debt by not writing and--probably kissing other girls?
"Maisie, you'll catch a chill. Do go and lie down," said the wearied voice of
her companion. "I can't sleep a wink with you at the window."

Maisie shrugged her shoulders and did not answer. She was reflecting on the
meannesses of Dick, and on other meannesses with which he had nothing to do.
The moonlight would not let her sleep. It lay on the skylight of the studio
across the road in cold silver; she stared at it intently and her thoughts
began to slide one into the other. The shadow of the big bell-handle in the
wall grew short, lengthened again, and faded out as the moon went down behind
the pasture and a hare came limping home across the road. Then the dawn-wind
washed through the upland grasses, and brought coolness with it, and the cattle
lowed by the drought-shrunk river. Maisie's head fell forward on the window-
sill, and the tangle of black hair covered her arms.

"Maisie, wake up. You'll catch a chill."

"Yes, dear; yes, dear." She staggered to her bed like a wearied child, and as
she buried her face in the pillows she muttered, "I think--I think--But he
ought to have written."

Day brought the routine of the studio, the smell of paint and turpentine, and
the monotone wisdom of Kami, who was a leaden artist, but a golden teacher if
the pupil were only in sympathy with him. Maisie was not in sympathy that day,
and she waited impatiently for the end of the work.

She knew when it was coming; for Kami would gather his black alpaca coat into a
bunch behind him, and, with faded flue eyes that saw neither pupils nor canvas,
look back into the past to recall the history of one Binat. "You have all done
not so badly," he would say. "But you shall remember that it is not enough to
have the method, and the art, and the power, nor even that which is touch, but
you shall have also the conviction that nails the work to the wall. Of the so
many I taught,"--here the students would begin to unfix drawing-pins or get
their tubes together,--"the very so many that I have taught, the best was
Binat. All that comes of the study and the work and the knowledge was to him
even when he came. After he left me he should have done all that could be done
with the colour, the form, and the knowledge. Only, he had not the conviction.
So today I hear no more of Binat,--the best of my pupils,--and that is long
ago. So today, too, you will be glad to hear no more of me. Continuez,
mesdemoiselles, and, above all, with conviction."

He went into the garden to smoke and mourn over the lost Binat as the pupils
dispersed to their several cottages or loitered in the studio to make plans for
the cool of the afternoon.

Maisie looked at her very unhappy Melancolia, restrained a desire to grimace
before it, and was hurrying across the road to write a letter to Dick, when she
was aware of a large man on a white troop-horse. How Torpenhow had managed in
the course of twenty hours to find his way to the hearts of the cavalry
officers in quarters at Vitry-sur-Marne, to discuss with them the certainty of
a glorious revenge for France, to reduce the colonel to tears of pure
affability, and to borrow the best horse in the squadron for the journey to
Kami's studio, is a mystery that only special correspondents can unravel.

"I beg your pardon," said he. "It seems an absurd question to ask, but the fact
is that I don't know her by any other name: Is there any young lady here that
is called Maisie?"

"I am Maisie," was the answer from the depths of a great sun-hat.

"I ought to introduce myself," he said, as the horse capered in the blinding
white dust. "My name is Torpenhow. Dick Heldar is my best friend, and--and--the
fact is that he has gone blind."

"Blind!" said Maisie, stupidly. "He can't be blind."

"He has been stone-blind for nearly two months."

Maisie lifted up her face, and it was pearly white. "No! No! Not blind! I won't
have him blind!"

"Would you care to see for yourself?" said Torpenhow.

"Now,--at once?"

"Oh, no! The Paris train doesn't go through this place till tonight. There will
be ample time."

"Did Mr. Heldar send you to me?"

"Certainly not. Dick wouldn't do that sort of thing. He's sitting in his
studio, turning over some letters that he can't read because he"s blind."

There was a sound of choking from the sun-hat. Maisie bowed her head and went
into the cottage, where the red-haired girl was on a sofa, complaining of a
headache.

"Dick's blind!" said Maisie, taking her breath quickly as she steadied herself
against a chair-back. "My Dick's blind!"

"What?" The girl was on the sofa no longer.

"A man has come from England to tell me. He hasn't written to me for six
weeks."

"Are you going to him?"

"I must think."

"Think! I should go back to London and see him and I should kiss his eyes and
kiss them and kiss them until they got well again! If you don't go I shall. Oh,
what am I talking about? You wicked little idiot! Go to him at once. Go!"

Torpenhow's neck was blistering, but he preserved a smile of infinite patience
as Maisie's appeared bareheaded in the sunshine.

"I am coming," said she, her eyes on the ground.

"You will be at Vitry Station, then, at seven this evening." This was an order
delivered by one who was used to being obeyed. Maisie said nothing, but she
felt grateful that there was no chance of disputing with this big man who took
everything for granted and managed a squealing horse with one hand. She
returned to the red-haired girl, who was weeping bitterly, and between tears,
kisses,--very few of those,--menthol, packing, and an interview with Kami, the
sultry afternoon wore away.

Thought might come afterwards. Her present duty was to go to Dick,--Dick who
owned the wondrous friend and sat in the dark playing with her unopened
letters.

"But what will you do," she said to her companion.

"I? Oh, I shall stay here and--finish your Melancolia," she said, smiling
pitifully. "Write to me afterwards."

That night there ran a legend through Vitry-sur-Marne of a mad Englishman,
doubtless suffering from sunstroke, who had drunk all the officers of the
garrison under the table, had borrowed a horse from the lines, and had then and
there eloped, after the English custom, with one of those more mad English
girls who drew pictures down there under the care of that good Monsieur Kami.

"They are very droll," said Suzanne to the conscript in the moonlight by the
studio wall. "She walked always with those big eyes that saw nothing, and yet
she kisses me on both cheeks as though she were my sister, and gives me--see--
ten francs!"

The conscript levied a contribution on both gifts; for he prided himself on
being a good soldier.

Torpenhow spoke very little to Maisie during the journey to Calais; but he was
careful to attend to all her wants, to get her a compartment entirely to
herself, and to leave her alone. He was amazed of the ease with which the
matter had been accomplished.

"The safest thing would be to let her think things out. By Dick's showing,--
when he was off his head,--she must have ordered him about very thoroughly.
Wonder how she likes being under orders."

Maisie never told. She sat in the empty compartment often with her eyes shut,
that she might realise the sensation of blindness. It was an order that she
should return to London swiftly, and she found herself at last almost beginning
to enjoy the situation. This was better than looking after luggage and a red-
haired friend who never took any interest in her surroundings. But there
appeared to be a feeling in the air that she, Maisie,--of all people,--was in
disgrace. Therefore she justified her conduct to herself with great success,
till Torpenhow came up to her on the steamer and without preface began to tell
the story of Dick"s blindness, suppressing a few details, but dwelling at
length on the miseries of delirium. He stopped before he reached the end, as
though he had lost interest in the subject, and went forward to smoke. Maisie
was furious with him and with herself.

She was hurried on from Dover to London almost before she could ask for
breakfast, and--she was past any feeling of indignation now--was bidden curtly
to wait in a hall at the foot of some lead-covered stairs while Torpenhow went
up to make inquiries. Again the knowledge that she was being treated like a
naughty little girl made her pale cheeks flame. It was all Dick's fault for
being so stupid as to go blind.

Torpenhow led her up to a shut door, which he opened very softly. Dick was
sitting by the window, with his chin on his chest. There were three envelopes
in his hand, and he turned them over and over. The big man who gave orders was
no longer by her side, and the studio door snapped behind her.

Dick thrust the letters into his pocket as he heard the sound. "Hullo, Torp! Is
that you? I've been so lonely."

His voice had taken the peculiar flatness of the blind. Maisie pressed herself
up into a corner of the room. Her heart was beating furiously, and she put one
hand on her breast to keep it quiet. Dick was staring directly at her, and she
realised for the first time that he was blind.

Shutting her eyes in a rail-way carriage to open them when she pleased was
child's play. This man was blind though his eyes were wide open.

"Torp, is that you? They said you were coming." Dick looked puzzled and a
little irritated at the silence.

"No; it's only me," was the answer, in a strained little whisper. Maisie could
hardly move her lips.

"H'm!" said Dick, composedly, without moving. "This is a new phenomenon.
Darkness I'm getting used to; but I object to hearing voices."

Was he mad, then, as well as blind, that he talked to himself? Maisie"s heart
beat more wildly, and she breathed in gasps. Dick rose and began to feel his
way across the room, touching each table and chair as he passed. Once he caught
his foot on a rug, and swore, dropping on his knees to feel what the
obstruction might be. Maisie remembered him walking in the Park as though all
the earth belonged to him, tramping up and down her studio two months ago, and
flying up the gangway of the Channel steamer. The beating of her heart was
making her sick, and Dick was coming nearer, guided by the sound of her
breathing. She put out a hand mechanically to ward him off or to draw him to
herself, she did not know which. It touched his chest, and he stepped back as
though he had been shot.

"It's Maisie!" said he, with a dry sob. "What are you doing here?"

"I came--I came--to see you, please."

Dick's lips closed firmly.

"Won't you sit down, then? You see, I've had some bother with my eyes, and----"

"I know. I know. Why didn't you tell me?"

"I couldn't write."

"You might have told Mr. Torpenhow."

"What has he to do with my affairs?"

"He--he brought me from Vitry-sur-Marne. He thought I ought to see you."

"Why, what has happened? Can I do anything for you? No, I can't. I forgot."

"Oh, Dick, I'm so sorry! I've come to tell you, and----Let me take you back to
your chair."

"Don't! I'm not a child. You only do that out of pity. I never meant to tell
you anything about it. I'm no good now. I'm down and done for. Let me alone!"

He groped back to his chair, his chest labouring as he sat down.

Maisie watched him, and the fear went out of her heart, to be followed by a
very bitter shame. He had spoken a truth that had been hidden from the girl
through every step of the impetuous flight to London; for he was, indeed, down
and done for--masterful no longer but rather a little abject; neither an artist
stronger than she, nor a man to be looked up to--only some blind one that sat
in a chair and seemed on the point of crying. She was immensely and unfeignedly
sorry for him--more sorry than she had ever been for any one in her life, but
not sorry enough to deny his words.

So she stood still and felt ashamed and a little hurt, because she had honestly
intended that her journey should end triumphantly; and now she was only filled
with pity most startlingly distinct from love.

"Well?" said Dick, his face steadily turned away. "I never meant to worry you
any more. What's the matter?"

He was conscious that Maisie was catching her breath, but was as unprepared as
herself for the torrent of emotion that followed. She had dropped into a chair
and was sobbing with her face hidden in her hands.

"I  can't--I  can't!" she cried desperately. "Indeed, I can't. It isn't my
fault. I'm so sorry. Oh, Dickie, I'm so sorry."

Dick's shoulders straightened again, for the words lashed like a whip.

Still the sobbing continued. It is not good to realise that you have failed in
the hour of trial or flinched before the mere possibility of making sacrifices.

"I do despise myself--indeed I do. But I can't. Oh, Dickie, you wouldn't ask
me--would you?" wailed Maisie.

She looked up for a minute, and by chance it happened that Dick's eyes fell on
hers. The unshaven face was very white and set, and the lips were trying to
force themselves into a smile. But it was the worn-out eyes that Maisie feared.
Her Dick had gone blind and left in his place some one that she could hardly
recognise till he spoke.

"Who is asking you to do anything, Maisie? I told you how it would be. What's
the use of worrying? For pity's sake don't cry like that; it isn't worth it."

"You don't know how I hate myself. Oh, Dick, help me--help me!" The passion of
tears had grown beyond her control and was beginning to alarm the man. He
stumbled forward and put his arm round her, and her head fell on his shoulder.

"Hush, dear, hush! Don't cry. You're quite right, and you've nothing to
reproach yourself with--you never had. You're only a little upset by the
journey, and I don't suppose you've had any breakfast. What a brute Torp was to
bring you over."

"I wanted to come. I did indeed," she protested.

"Very well. And now you've come and seen, and I'm--immensely grateful. When
you're better you shall go away and get something to eat. What sort of a
passage did you have coming over?"

Maisie was crying more subduedly, for the first time in her life glad that she
had something to lean against. Dick patted her on the shoulder tenderly but
clumsily, for he was not quite sure where her shoulder might be.

She drew herself out of his arms at last and waited, trembling and most
unhappy. He had felt his way to the window to put the width of the room between
them, and to quiet a little the tumult in his heart.

"Are you better now?" he said.

"Yes, but--don't you hate me?"

"I hate you? My God! I?"

"Isn't--isn't there anything I could do for you, then? I'll stay here in
England to do it, if you like. Perhaps I could come and see you sometimes."

"I think not, dear. It would be kindest not to see me any more, please. I don't
want to seem rude, but--don't you think--perhaps you had almost better go now."

He was conscious that he could not bear himself as a man if the strain
continued much longer.

"I don't deserve anything else. I'll go, Dick. Oh, I'm so miserable."

"Nonsense. You've nothing to worry about; I'd tell you if you had. Wait a
moment, dear. I've got something to give you first. I meant it for you ever
since this little trouble began. It's my Melancolia; she was a beauty when I
last saw her. You can keep her for me, and if ever you're poor you can sell
her. She's worth a few hundreds at any state of the market." He groped among
his canvases. "She's framed in black. Is this a black frame that I have my hand
on? There she is. What do you think of her?"

He turned a scarred formless muddle of paint towards Maisie, and the eyes
strained as though they would catch her wonder and surprise. One thing and one
thing only could she do for him.

"Well?"

The voice was fuller and more rounded, because the man knew he was speaking of
his best work. Maisie looked at the blur, and a lunatic desire to laugh caught
her by the throat. But for Dick's sake--whatever this mad blankness might mean-
-she must make no sign. Her voice choked with hard-held tears as she answered,
still gazing at the wreck--"Oh, Dick, it is good!"

He heard the little hysterical gulp and took it for tribute. "Won't you have
it, then? I'll send it over to your house if you will."

"I? Oh yes--thank you. Ha! ha!" If she did not fly at once the laughter that
was worse than tears would kill her. She turned and ran, choking and blinded,
down the staircases that were empty of life to take refuge in a cab and go to
her house across the Parks. There she sat down in the dismantled drawing-room
and thought of Dick in his blindness, useless till the end of life, and of
herself in her own eyes. Behind the sorrow, the shame, and the humiliation, lay
fear of the cold wrath of the red-haired girl when Maisie should return. Maisie
had never feared her companion before. Not until she found herself saying,
"Well, he never asked me," did she realise her scorn of herself.
And that is the end of Maisie.
* * * * * *

For Dick was reserved more searching torment. He could not realise at first
that Maisie, whom he had ordered to go had left him without a word of farewell.
He was savagely angry against Torpenhow, who had brought upon him this
humiliation and troubled his miserable peace. Then his dark hour came and he
was alone with himself and his desires to get what help he could from the
darkness. The queen could do no wrong, but in following the right, so far as it
served her work, she had wounded her one subject more than his own brain would
let him know.

"It's all I had and I've lost it," he said, as soon as the misery permitted
clear thinking. "And Torp will think that he has been so infernally clever that
I shan't have the heart to tell him. I must think this out quietly."

"Hullo!" said Torpenhow, entering the studio after Dick had enjoyed two hours
of thought. "I'm back. Are you feeling any better?"

"Torp, I don't know what to say. Come here." Dick coughed huskily, wondering,
indeed, what he should say, and how to say it temperately.

"What's the need for saying anything? Get up and tramp." Torpenhow was
perfectly satisfied.

They walked up and down as of custom, Torpenhow's hand on Dick's shoulder, and
Dick buried in his own thoughts.

"How in the world did you find it all out?" said Dick, at last.

"You shouldn't go off your head if you want to keep secrets, Dickie. It was
absolutely impertinent on my part; but if you'd seen me rocketing about on a
half-trained French troop-horse under a blazing sun you'd have laughed. There
will be a charivari in my rooms tonight. Seven other devils----"

"I know--the row in the Southern Soudan. I surprised their councils the other
day, and it made me unhappy. Have you fixed your flint to go? Who d'you work
for?"

"Haven't signed any contracts yet. I wanted to see how your business would turn
out."

"Would you have stayed with me, then, if--things had gone wrong?" He put his
question cautiously.

"Don't ask me too much. I'm only a man."

"You've tried to be an angel very successfully."

"Oh ye--es! . . . Well, do you attend the function tonight? We shall be half
screwed before the morning. All the men believe the war's a certainty."

"I don't think I will, old man, if it's all the same to you. I'll stay quiet
here."

"And meditate? I don't blame you. You observe a good time if ever a man did."

That night there was a tumult on the stairs. The correspondents poured in from
theatre, dinner, and music-hall to Torpenhow's room that they might discuss
their plan of campaign in the event of military operations becoming a
certainty. Torpenhow, the Keneu,, and the Nilghai had bidden all the men they
had worked with to the orgy; and Mr. Beeton, the housekeeper, declared that
never before in his checkered experience had he seen quite such a fancy lot of
gentlemen. They waked the chambers with shoutings and song; and the elder men
were quite as bad as the younger. For the chances of war were in front of them,
and all knew what those meant.

Sitting in his own room a little perplexed by the noise across the landing,
Dick suddenly began to laugh to himself.

"When one comes to think of it the situation is intensely comic. Maisie"s quite
right--poor little thing. I didn't know she could cry like that before; but now
I know what Torp thinks, I'm sure he'd be quite fool enough to stay at home and
try to console me--if he knew. Besides, it isn't nice to own that you've been
thrown over like a broken chair. I must carry this business through alone--as
usual. If there isn't a war, and Torp finds out, I shall look foolish, that's
all. If there is a way I mustn't interfere with another man's chances. Business
is business, and I want to be alone--I want to be alone. What a row they're
making!"

Somebody hammered at the studio door.

"Come out and frolic, Dickie," said the Nilghai.

"I should like to, but I can't. I'm not feeling frolicsome."

"Then, I'll tell the boys and they'll drag you like a badger."

"Please not, old man. On my word, I'd sooner be left alone just now."

"Very good. Can we send anything in to you? Fizz, for instance. Cassavetti is
beginning to sing songs of the Sunny South already."

For one minute Dick considered the proposition seriously.

"No, thanks, I've a headache already."

"Virtuous child. That's the effect of emotion on the young. All my
congratulations, Dick. I also was concerned in the conspiracy for your
welfare."

"Go to the devil--oh, send Binkie in here."

The little dog entered on elastic feet, riotous from having been made much of
all the evening. He had helped to sing the choruses; but scarcely inside the
studio he realised that this was no place for tail-wagging, and settled himself
on Dick's lap till it was bedtime. Then he went to bed with Dick, who counted
every hour as it struck, and rose in the morning with a painfully clear head to
receive Torpenhow's more formal congratulations and a particular account of the
last night's revels.

"You aren't looking very happy for a newly accepted man," said Torpenhow.

"Never mind that--it's my own affair, and I'm all right. Do you really go?"

"Yes. With the old Central Southern as usual. They wired, and I accepted on
better terms than before."

"When do you start?"

"The day after tomorrow--for Brindisi."

"Thank God." Dick spoke from the bottom of his heart.

"Well, that's not a pretty way of saying you're glad to get rid of me. But men
in your condition are allowed to be selfish."

"I didn't mean that. Will you get a hundred pounds cashed for me before you
leave?"

"That's a slender amount for housekeeping, isn't it?"

"Oh, it's only for--marriage expenses."

Torpenhow brought him the money, counted it out in fives and tens, and
carefully put it away in the writing table.

"Now I suppose I shall have to listen to his ravings about his girl until I go.
Heaven send us patience with a man in love!" he said to himself.

But never a word did Dick say of Maisie or marriage. He hung in the doorway of
Torpenhow's room when the latter was packing and asked innumerable questions
about the coming campaign, till Torpenhow began to feel annoyed.

"You're a secretive animal, Dickie, and you consume your own smoke, don't you?"
he said on the last evening.

"I--I suppose so. By the way, how long do you think this war will last?"

"Days, weeks, or months. One can never tell. It may go on for years."

"I wish I were going."

"Good Heavens! You're the most unaccountable creature! Hasn't it occurred to
you that you're going to be married--thanks to me?"

"Of course, yes. I'm going to be married--so I am. Going to be married. I'm
awfully grateful to you. Haven't I told you that?"

"You might be going to be hanged by the look of you," said Torpenhow.

And the next day Torpenhow bade him good-bye and left him to the loneliness he
had so much desired.

CHAPTER XIV

Yet at the last, ere our spearmen had found him,
Yet at the last, ere a sword-thrust could save,
Yet at the last, with his masters around him,
He of the Faith spoke as master to slave;
Yet at the last, tho' the Kafirs had maimed him,
Broken by bondage and wrecked by the reiver,--
Yet at the last, tho' the darkness had claimed him,
He called upon Allah and died a believer.--Kizzilbashi.

"Beg your pardon, Mr. Heldar, but--but isn'tn othin" going to happen?" said Mr.
Beeton.

"No!" Dick had just waked to another morning of blank despair and his temper
was of the shortest.

"'Tain't my regular business, 'o course, sir; and what I say is, 'Mind your own
business and let other people mind theirs;' but just before Mr. Torpenhow went
away he give me to understand, like, that you might be moving into a house of
your own, so to speak--a sort of house with rooms upstairs and downstairs where
you'd be better attended to, though I try to act just by all our tenants. Don't
I?"

"Ah! That must have been a mad-house. I shan't trouble you to take me there
yet. Get me my breakfast, please, and leave me alone."

"I hope I haven't done anything wrong, sir, but you know I hope that as far as
a man can I tries to do the proper thing by all the gentlemen in chambers--and
more particular those whose lot is hard--such as you, for instance, Mr. Heldar.
You likes soft-roe bloater, don't you? Soft-roe bloaters is scarcer than hard-
roe, but what I says is, 'Never mind a little extra trouble so long as you give
satisfaction to the tenants.'"

Mr. Beeton withdrew and left Dick to himself. Torpenhow had been long away;
there was no more rioting in the chambers, and Dick had settled down to his new
life, which he was weak enough to consider nothing better than death.

It is hard to live alone in the dark, confusing the day and night; dropping to
sleep through sheer weariness at mid-day, and rising restless in the chill of
the dawn. At first Dick, on his awakenings, would grope along the corridors of
the chambers till he heard some one snore. Then he would know that the day had
not yet come, and return wearily to his bedroom.

Later he learned not to stir till there was a noise and movement in the house
and Mr. Beeton advised him to get up. Once dressed--and dressing, now that
Torpenhow was away, was a lengthy business, because collars, ties, and the like
hid themselves in far corners of the room, and search meant head-beating
against chairs and trunks--once dressed, there was nothing whatever to do
except to sit still and brood till the three daily meals came. Centuries
separated breakfast from lunch and lunch from dinner, and though a man prayed
for hundreds of years that his mind might be taken from him, God would never
hear. Rather the mind was quickened and the revolving thoughts ground against
each other as millstones grind when there is no corn between; and yet the brain
would not wear out and give him rest. It continued to think, at length, with
imagery and all manner of reminiscences. It recalled Maisie and past success,
reckless travels by land and sea, the glory of doing work and feeling that it
was good, and suggested all that might have happened had the eyes only been
faithful to their duty. When thinking ceased through sheer weariness, there
poured into Dick's soul tide on tide of overwhelming, purposeless fear--dread
of starvation always, terror lest the unseen ceiling should crush down upon
him, fear of fire in the chambers and a louse's death in red flame, and agonies
of fiercer horror that had nothing to do with any fear of death. Then Dick
bowed his head, and clutching the arms of his chair fought with his sweating
self till the tinkle of plates told him that something to eat was being set
before him.

Mr. Beeton would bring the meal when he had time to spare, and Dick learned to
hang upon his speech, which dealt with badly fitted gas-plugs, waste-pipes out
of repair, little tricks for driving picture-nails into walls, and the sins of
the charwoman or the housemaids. In the lack of better things the small gossip
of a servants' hall becomes immensely interesting, and the screwing of a washer
on a tap an event to be talked over for days.

Once or twice a week, too, Mr. Beeton would take Dick out with him when he went
marketing in the morning to haggle with tradesmen over fish, lamp-wicks,
mustard, tapioca, and so forth, while Dick rested his weight first on one foot
and then on the other and played aimlessly with the tins and string-ball on the
counter. Then they would perhaps meet one of Mr. Beeton's friends, and Dick,
standing aside a little, would hold his peace till Mr. Beeton was willing to go
on again.

The life did not increase his self-respect. He abandoned shaving as a dangerous
exercise, and being shaved in a barber's shop meant exposure of his infirmity.
He could not see that his clothes were properly brushed, and since he had never
taken any care of his personal appearance he became every known variety of
sloven. A blind man cannot deal with cleanliness till he has been some months
used to the darkness. If he demand attendance and grow angry at the want of it,
he must assert himself and stand upright. Then the meanest menial can see that
he is blind and, therefore, of no consequence. A wise man will keep his eyes on
the floor and sit still. For amusement he may pick coal lump by lump out of the
scuttle with the tongs and pile it in a little heap in the fender, keeping
count of the lumps, which must all be put back again, one by one and very
carefully. He may set himself sums if he cares to work them out; he may talk to
himself or to the cat if she chooses to visit him; and if his trade has been
that of an artist, he may sketch in the air with his forefinger; but that is
too much like drawing a pig with the eyes shut. He may go to his bookshelves
and count his books, ranging them in order of their size; or to his wardrobe
and count his shirts, laying them in piles of two or three on the bed, as they
suffer from frayed cuffs or lost buttons.

Even this entertainment wearies after a time; and all the times are very, very
long.

Dick was allowed to sort a tool-chest where Mr. Beeton kept hammers, taps and
nuts, lengths of gas-pipes, oil-bottles, and string.

"If I don't have everything just where I know where to look for it, why, then,
I can't find anything when I do want it. You've no idea, sir, the amount of
little things that these chambers uses up," said Mr. Beeton.

Fumbling at the handle of the door as he went out: "It's hard on you, sir, I do
think it's hard on you. Ain't you going to do anything, sir?"

"I'll pay my rent and messing. Isn't that enough?"

"I wasn't doubting for a moment that you couldn't pay your way, sir; but I 'ave
often said to my wife, 'It's 'ard on 'im because it isn't as if he was an old
man, nor yet a middle-aged one, but quite a young gentleman. That's where it
comes so 'ard.'"

"I suppose so," said Dick, absently. This particular nerve through long
battering had ceased to feel--much.

"I was thinking," continued Mr. Beeton, still making as if to go, "that you
might like to hear my boy Alf read you the papers sometimes of an evening. He
do read beautiful, seeing he's only nine."

"I should be very grateful," said Dick. "Only let me make it worth his while."

"We wasn't thinking of that, sir, but of course it's in your own 'ands; but
only to 'ear Alf sing 'A Boy's best Friend is 'is Mother!' Ah!"

"I'll hear him sing that too. Let him come this evening with the newspapers."

Alf was not a nice child, being puffed up with many school-board certificates
for good conduct, and inordinately proud of his singing. Mr. Beeton remained,
beaming, while the child wailed his way through a song of some eight eight-line
verses in the usual whine of a young Cockney, and, after compliments, left him
to read Dick the foreign telegrams. Ten minutes later Alf returned to his
parents rather pale and scared.

"'E said "e couldn't stand it no more," he explained.

"He never said you read badly, Alf?" Mrs. Beeton spoke.

"No. 'E said I read beautiful. Said 'e never 'eard any one read like that, but
'e said 'e couldn't abide the stuff in the papers."

"P'raps he's lost some money in the Stocks. Were you readin' him about Stocks,
Alf?"

"No; it was all about fightin' out there where the soldiers is gone--a great
long piece with all the lines close together and very hard words in it. 'E give
me 'arf a crown because I read so well. And 'e says the next time there's
anything 'e wants read 'e'll send for me."

"That's good hearing, but I do think for all the half-crown--put it into the
kicking-donkey money-box, Alf, and let me see you do it--he might have kept you
longer. Why, he couldn't have begun to understand how beautiful you read."

"He's best left to hisself--gentlemen always are when they"re downhearted,"
said Mr. Beeton.

Alf's rigorously limited powers of comprehending Torpenhow"s special
correspondence had waked the devil of unrest in Dick. He could hear, through
the boy's nasal chant, the camels grunting in the squares behind the soldiers
outside Suakin; could hear the men swearing and chaffing across the cooking
pots, and could smell the acrid wood-smoke as it drifted over camp before the
wind of the desert.

That night he prayed to God that his mind might be taken from him, offering for
proof that he was worthy of this favour the fact that he had not shot himself
long ago. That prayer was not answered, and indeed Dick knew in his heart of
hearts that only a lingering sense of humour and no special virtue had kept him
alive. Suicide, he had persuaded himself, would be a ludicrous insult to the
gravity of the situation as well as a weak-kneed confession of fear.

"Just for the fun of the thing," he said to the cat, who had taken Binkie's
place in his establishment, "I should like to know how long this is going to
last. I can live for a year on the hundred pounds Torp cashed for me. I must
have two or three thousand at least in the Bank--twenty or thirty years more
provided for, that is to say. Then I fall back on my hundred and twenty a year,
which will be more by that time. Let's consider.

"Twenty-five--thirty-five--a man's in his prime then, they say--forty-five--a
middle-aged man just entering politics--fifty-five 'died at the comparatively
early age of fifty-five,' according to the newspapers. Bah! How these
Christians funk death! Sixty-five--we're only getting on in years. Seventy-five
is just possible, though. Great hell, cat O! fifty years more of solitary
confinement in the dark! You"ll die, and Beeton will die, and Torp will die,
and Mai--everybody else will die, but I shall be alive and kicking with nothing
to do. I'm very sorry for myself. I should like some one else to be sorry for
me. Evidently I'm not going mad before I die, but the pain's just as bad as
ever. Some day when you're vivisected, cat O! they'll tie you down on a little
table and cut you open--but don't be afraid; they'll take precious good care
that you don't die. You'll live, and you'll be very sorry then that you weren't
sorry for me. Perhaps Torp will come back or . . . I wish I could go to Torp
and the Nilghai, even though I were in their way."

Pussy left the room before the speech was ended, and Alf, as he entered, found
Dick addressing the empty hearth-rug.

"There's a letter for you, sir," he said. "Perhaps you'd like me to read it."

"Lend it to me for a minute and I'll tell you."

The outstretched hand shook just a little and the voice was not over-steady. It
was within the limits of human possibility that--that was no letter from
Maisie. He knew the heft of three closed envelopes only too well. It was a
foolish hope that the girl should write to him, for he did not realise that
there is a wrong which admits of no reparation though the evildoer may with
tears and the heart's best love strive to mend all. It is best to forget that
wrong whether it be caused or endured, since it is as remediless as bad work
once put forward.

"Read it, then," said Dick, and Alf began intoning according to the rules of
the Board School--"'I could have given you love, I could have given you
loyalty, such as you never dreamed of. Do you suppose I cared what you were?
But you chose to whistle everything down the wind for nothing. My only excuse
for you is that you are so young.' "That's all," he said, returning the paper
to be dropped into the fire.

"What was in the letter?" asked Mrs. Beeton, when Alf returned.

"I don't know. I think it was a circular or a tract about not whistlin' at
everything when you're young."

"I must have stepped on something when I was alive and walking about and it has
bounced up and hit me. God help it, whatever it is--unless it was all a joke.
But I don't know any one who"d take the trouble to play a joke on me--Love and
loyalty for nothing. It sounds tempting enough. I wonder whether I have lost
anything really?"

Dick considered for a long time but could not remember when or how he had put
himself in the way of winning these trifles at a woman's hands.

Still, the letter as touching on matters that he preferred not to think about
stung him into a fit of frenzy that lasted for a day and night. When his heart
was so full of despair that it would hold no more, body and soul together
seemed to be dropping without check through the darkness.

Then came fear of darkness and desperate attempts to reach the light again. But
there was no light to be reached. When that agony had left him sweating and
breathless, the downward flight would recommence till the gathering torture of
it spurred him into another fight as hopeless as the first. Followed some few
minutes of sleep in which he dreamed that he saw. Then the procession of events
would repeat itself till he was utterly worn out and the brain took up its
everlasting consideration of Maisie and might-have-beens.

At the end of everything Mr. Beeton came to his room and volunteered to take
him out. "Not marketing this time, but we'll go into the Parks if you like."

"Be damned if I do," quoth Dick. "Keep to the streets and walk up and down. I
like to hear the people round me."

This was not altogether true. The blind in the first stages of their infirmity
dislike those who can move with a free stride and unlifted arms--but Dick had
no earthly desire to go to the Parks. Once and only once since Maisie had shut
her door he had gone there under Alf's charge. Alf forgot him and fished for
minnows in the Serpentine with some companions. After half an hour's waiting
Dick, almost weeping with rage and wrath, caught a passer-by, who introduced
him to a friendly policeman, who led him to a four-wheeler opposite the Albert
Hall. He never told Mr. Beeton of Alf's forgetfulness, but . . . this was not
the manner in which he was used to walk the Parks aforetime.

"What streets would you like to walk down, then?" said Mr. Beeton,
sympathetically. His own ideas of a riotous holiday meant picnicking on the
grass of Green Park with his family, and half a dozen paper bags full of food.

"Keep to the river," said Dick, and they kept to the river, and the rush of it
was in his ears till they came to Blackfriars Bridge and struck thence on to
the Waterloo Road, Mr. Beeton explaining the beauties of the scenery as he went
on.

"And walking on the other side of the pavement," said he, "unless I'm much
mistaken, is the young woman that used to come to your rooms to be drawed. I
never forgets a face and I never remembers a name, except paying tenants, 'o
course!"

"Stop her," said Dick. "It's Bessie Broke. Tell her I'd like to speak to her
again. Quick, man!"

Mr. Beeton crossed the road under the noses of the omnibuses and arrested
Bessie then on her way northward. She recognised him as the man in authority
who used to glare at her when she passed up Dick"s staircase, and her first
impulse was to run.

"Wasn't you Mr. Heldar's model?" said Mr. Beeton, planting himself in front of
her. "You was. He's on the other side of the road and he'd like to see you."

"Why?" said Bessie, faintly. She remembered--indeed had never for long
forgotten--an affair connected with a newly finished picture.

"Because he has asked me to do so, and because he's most particular blind."

"Drunk?"

"No. 'Orspital blind. He can't see. That's him over there."

Dick was leaning against the parapet of the bridge as Mr. Beeton pointed him
out--a stub-bearded, bowed creature wearing a dirty magenta-coloured neckcloth
outside an unbrushed coat. There was nothing to fear from such an one. Even if
he chased her, Bessie thought, he could not follow far. She crossed over, and
Dick's face lighted up. It was long since a woman of any kind had taken the
trouble to speak to him.

"I hope you're well, Mr. Heldar?" said Bessie, a little puzzled. Mr. Beeton
stood by with the air of an ambassador and breathed responsibly.

"I'm very well indeed, and, by Jove! I'm glad to see--hear you, I mean, Bess.
You never thought it worth while to turn up and see us again after you got your
money. I don't know why you should. Are you going anywhere in particular just
now?"

"I was going for a walk," said Bessie.

"Not the old business?" Dick spoke under his breath.

"Lor, no! I paid my premium"--Bessie was very proud of that word--"for a
barmaid, sleeping in, and I'm at the bar now quite respectable. Indeed I am."

Mr. Beeton had no special reason to believe in the loftiness of human nature.
Therefore he dissolved himself like a mist and returned to his gas-plugs
without a word of apology. Bessie watched the flight with a certain uneasiness;
but so long as Dick appeared to be ignorant of the harm that had been done to
him . . .

"It's hard work pulling the beer-handles," she went on, "and they've got one of
them penny-in-the-slot cash-machines, so if you get wrong by a penny at the end
of the day--but then I don't believe the machinery is right. Do you?"

"I've only seen it work. Mr. Beeton."

"He's gone.

"I'm afraid I must ask you to help me home, then. I'll make it worth your
while. You see." The sightless eyes turned towards her and Bessie saw.

"It isn't taking you out of your way?" he said hesitatingly. "I can ask a
policeman if it is."

"Not at all. I come on at seven and I'm off at four. That's easy hours."

"Good God!--but I'm on all the time. I wish I had some work to do too. Let's go
home, Bess."

He turned and cannoned into a man on the sidewalk, recoiling with an oath.
Bessie took his arm and said nothing--as she had said nothing when he had
ordered her to turn her face a little more to the light. They walked for some
time in silence, the girl steering him deftly through the crowd.

"And where's--where's Mr. Torpenhow?" she inquired at last.

"He has gone away to the desert."

"Where's that?"

Dick pointed to the right. "East--out of the mouth of the river," said he.

"Then west, then south, and then east again, all along the under-side of
Europe. Then south again, God knows how far." The explanation did not enlighten
Bessie in the least, but she held her tongue and looked to Dick"s patch till
they came to the chambers.

"We'll have tea and muffins," he said joyously. "I can't tell you, Bessie, how
glad I am to find you again. What made you go away so suddenly?"

"I didn't think you'd want me any more," she said, emboldened by his ignorance.

"I didn't, as a matter of fact--but afterwards--At any rate I'm glad you've
come. You know the stairs."

So Bessie led him home to his own place--there was no one to hinder--and shut
the door of the studio.

"What a mess!" was her first word. "All these things haven't been looked after
for months and months."

"No, only weeks, Bess. You can't expect them to care."

"I don't know what you expect them to do. They ought to know what you've paid
them for. The dust's just awful. It's all over the easel."

"I don't use it much now."

"All over the pictures and the floor, and all over your coat. I'd like to speak
to them housemaids."

"Ring for tea, then." Dick felt his way to the one chair he used by custom.

Bessie saw the action and, as far as in her lay, was touched. But there
remained always a keen sense of new-found superiority, and it was in her voice
when she spoke.

"How long have you been like this?" she said wrathfully, as though the
blindness were some fault of the housemaids.

"How?"

"As you are."

"The day after you went away with the check, almost as soon as my picture was
finished; I hardly saw her alive."

"Then they've been cheating you ever since, that's all. I know their nice
little ways."

A woman may love one man and despise another, but on general feminine
principles she will do her best to save the man she despises from being
defrauded. Her loved one can look to himself, but the other man, being
obviously an idiot, needs protection.

"I don't think Mr. Beeton cheats much," said Dick. Bessie was flouncing up and
down the room, and he was conscious of a keen sense of enjoyment as he heard
the swish of her skirts and the light step between.

"Tea and muffins," she said shortly, when the ring at the bell was answered;
"two teaspoonfuls and one over for the pot. I don't want the old teapot that
was here when I used to come. It don't draw. Get another."

The housemaid went away scandalised, and Dick chuckled. Then he began to cough
as Bessie banged up and down the studio disturbing the dust.

"What are you trying to do?"

"Put things straight. This is like unfurnished lodgings. How could you let it
go so?"

"How could I help it? Dust away."

She dusted furiously, and in the midst of all the pother entered Mrs. Beeton.
Her husband on his return had explained the situation, winding up with the
peculiarly felicitous proverb, "Do unto others as you would be done by." She
had descended to put into her place the person who demanded muffins and an
uncracked teapot as though she had a right to both.

"Muffins ready yet?" said Bess, still dusting. She was no longer a drab of the
streets but a young lady who, thanks to Dick's check, had paid her premium and
was entitled to pull beer-handles with the best. Being neatly dressed in black
she did not hesitate to face Mrs. Beeton, and there passed between the two
women certain regards that Dick would have appreciated. The situation adjusted
itself by eye. Bessie had won, and Mrs. Beeton returned to cook muffins and
make scathing remarks about models, hussies, trollops, and the like, to her
husband.

"There's nothing to be got of interfering with him, Liza," he said. "Alf, you
go along into the street to play. When he isn't crossed he's as kindly as kind,
but when he's crossed he's the devil and all. We took too many little things
out of his rooms since he was blind to be that particular about what he does.
They ain't no objects to a blind man, of course, but if it was to come into
court we'd get the sack. Yes, I did introduce him to that girl because I'm a
feelin' man myself."

"Much too feelin'!" Mrs. Beeton slapped the muffins into the dish, and thought
of comely housemaids long since dismissed on suspicion.

"I ain't ashamed of it, and it isn't for us to judge him hard so long as he
pays quiet and regular as he do. I know how to manage young gentlemen, you know
how to cook for them, and what I says is, let each stick to his own business
and then there won't be any trouble. Take them muffins down, Liza, and be sure
you have no words with that young woman. His lot is cruel hard, and if he's
crossed he do swear worse than any one I"ve ever served."

"That's a little better," said Bessie, sitting down to the tea. "You needn't
wait, thank you, Mrs. Beeton."

"I had no intention of doing such, I do assure you."

Bessie made no answer whatever. This, she knew, was the way in which real
ladies routed their foes, and when one is a barmaid at a first-class public-
house one may become a real lady at ten minutes' notice.

Her eyes fell on Dick opposite her and she was both shocked and displeased.
There were droppings of food all down the front of his coat; the mouth under
the ragged ill-grown beard drooped sullenly; the forehead was lined and
contracted; and on the lean temples the hair was a dusty indeterminate colour
that might or might not have been called gray. The utter misery and self-
abandonment of the man appealed to her, and at the bottom of her heart lay the
wicked feeling that he was humbled and brought low who had once humbled her.

"Oh! it is good to hear you moving about," said Dick, rubbing his hands. "Tell
us all about your bar successes, Bessie, and the way you live now."

"Never mind that. I'm quite respectable, as you'd see by looking at me. You
don't seem to live too well. What made you go blind that sudden? Why isn't
there any one to look after you?"

Dick was too thankful for the sound of her voice to resent the tone of it.

"I was cut across the head a long time ago, and that ruined my eyes. I don't
suppose anybody thinks it worth while to look after me any more. Why should
they?--and Mr. Beeton really does everything I want."

"Don't you know any gentlemen and ladies, then, while you was--well?"

"A few, but I don't care to have them looking at me."

"I suppose that's why you've growed a beard. Take it off, it don"t become you."

"Good gracious, child, do you imagine that I think of what becomes of me these
days?"

"You ought. Get that taken off before I come here again. I suppose I can come,
can't I?"

"I'd be only too grateful if you did. I don't think I treated you very well in
the old days. I used to make you angry."

"Very angry, you did."

"I'm sorry for it, then. Come and see me when you can and as often as you can.
God knows, there isn't a soul in the world to take that trouble except you and
Mr. Beeton."

"A lot of trouble he's taking and she too." This with a toss of the head.

"They've let you do anyhow and they haven't done anything for you. I've only to
look and see that much. I'll come, and I'll be glad to come, but you must go
and be shaved, and you must get some other clothes--those ones aren't fit to be
seen."

"I have heaps somewhere," he said helplessly.

"I know you have. Tell Mr. Beeton to give you a new suit and I'll brush it and
keep it clean. You may be as blind as a barn-door, Mr. Heldar, but it doesn't
excuse you looking like a sweep."

"Do I look like a sweep, then?"

"Oh, I'm sorry for you. I'm that sorry for you!" she cried impulsively, and
took Dick's hands. Mechanically, he lowered his head as if to kiss--she was the
only woman who had taken pity on him, and he was not too proud for a little
pity now. She stood up to go.

"Nothing 'o that kind till you look more like a gentleman. It's quite easy when
you get shaved, and some clothes."

He could hear her drawing on her gloves and rose to say good-bye. She passed
behind him, kissed him audaciously on the back of the neck, and ran away as
swiftly as on the day when she had destroyed the Melancolia.

"To think of me kissing Mr. Heldar," she said to herself, "after all he's done
to me and all! Well, I'm sorry for him, and if he was shaved he wouldn't be so
bad to look at, but . . . Oh them Beetons, how shameful they've treated him! I
know Beeton's wearing his shirt on his back today just as well as if I'd aired
it. Tomorrow, I'll see . . . I wonder if he has much of his own. It might be
worth more than the bar--I wouldn't have to do any work--and just as
respectable as if no one knew."

Dick was not grateful to Bessie for her parting gift. He was acutely conscious
of it in the nape of his neck throughout the night, but it seemed, among very
many other things, to enforce the wisdom of getting shaved.

He was shaved accordingly in the morning, and felt the better for it. A fresh
suit of clothes, white linen, and the knowledge that some one in the world said
that she took an interest in his personal appearance made him carry himself
almost upright; for the brain was relieved for a while from thinking of Maisie,
who, under other circumstances, might have given that kiss and a million
others.

"Let us consider," said he, after lunch. "The girl can't care, and it's a toss-
up whether she comes again or not, but if money can buy her to look after me
she shall be bought. Nobody else in the world would take the trouble, and I can
make it worth her while. She's a child of the gutter holding brevet rank as a
barmaid; so she shall have everything she wants if she'll only come and talk
and look after me." He rubbed his newly shorn chin and began to perplex himself
with the thought of her not coming. "I suppose I did look rather a sweep," he
went on. "I had no reason to look otherwise. I knew things dropped on my
clothes, but it didn't matter. It would be cruel if she didn't come. She must.
Maisie came once, and that was enough for her. She was quite right. She had
something to work for. This creature has only beer-handles to pull, unless she
has deluded some young man into keeping company with her. Fancy being cheated
for the sake of a counter-jumper! We're falling pretty low."

Something cried aloud within him:--This will hurt more than anything that has
gone before. It will recall and remind and suggest and tantalise, and in the
end drive you mad.

"I know it, I know it!" Dick cried, clenching his hands despairingly; "but,
good heavens! is a poor blind beggar never to get anything out of his life
except three meals a day and a greasy waistcoat? I wish she'd come."

Early in the afternoon time she came, because there was no young man in her
life just then, and she thought of material advantages which would allow her to
be idle for the rest of her days.

"I shouldn't have known you," she said approvingly. "You look as you used to
look--a gentleman that was proud of himself."

"Don't you think I deserve another kiss, then?" said Dick, flushing a little.

"Maybe--but you won't get it yet. Sit down and let's see what I can do for you.
I'm certain sure Mr. Beeton cheats you, now that you can't go through the
housekeeping books every month. Isn't that true?"

"You'd better come and housekeep for me then, Bessie."

"Couldn't do it in these chambers--you know that as well as I do."

"I know, but we might go somewhere else, if you thought it worth your while."

"I'd try to look after you, anyhow; but I shouldn't care to have to work for
both of us." This was tentative.

Dick laughed.

"Do you remember where I used to keep my bank-book?" said he. "Torp took it to
be balanced just before he went away. Look and see."

"It was generally under the tobacco-jar. Ah!"

"Well?"

"Oh! Four thousand two hundred and ten pounds nine shillings and a penny! Oh
my!"

"You can have the penny. That's not bad for one year's work. Is that and a
hundred and twenty pounds a year good enough?"

The idleness and the pretty clothes were almost within her reach now, but she
must, by being housewifely, show that she deserved them.

"Yes; but you'd have to move, and if we took an inventory, I think we"d find
that Mr. Beeton has been prigging little things out of the rooms here and
there. They don't look as full as they used."

"Never mind, we'll let him have them. The only thing I"m particularly anxious
to take away is that picture I used you for--when you used to swear at me.
We'll pull out of this place, Bess, and get away as far as ever we can."

"Oh yes," she said uneasily.

"I don't know where I can go to get away from myself, but I'll try, and you
shall have all the pretty frocks that you care for. You'll like that. Give me
that kiss now, Bess. Ye gods! it's good to put one's arm round a woman's waist
again."

Then came the fulfilment of the prophecy within the brain. If his arm were thus
round Maisie's waist and a kiss had just been given and taken between them,--
why then . . . He pressed the girl more closely to himself because the pain
whipped him. She was wondering how to explain a little accident to the
Melancolia. At any rate, if this man really desired the solace of her company--
and certainly he would relapse into his original slough if she withdrew it--he
would not be more than just a little vexed.

It would be delightful at least to see what would happen, and by her teachings
it was good for a man to stand in certain awe of his companion.

She laughed nervously, and slipped out of his reach.

"I shouldn't worrit about that picture if I was you," she began, in the hope of
turning his attention.

"It's at the back of all my canvases somewhere. Find it, Bess; you know it as
well as I do."

"I know--but--"

"But what? You've wit enough to manage the sale of it to a dealer. Women haggle
much better than men. It might be a matter of eight or nine hundred pounds to--
to us. I simply didn't like to think about it for a long time. It was mixed up
with my life so.--But we'll cover up our tracks and get rid of everything, eh?
Make a fresh start from the beginning, Bess."

Then she began to repent very much indeed, because she knew the value of money.
Still, it was probable that the blind man was overestimating the value of his
work. Gentlemen, she knew, were absurdly particular about their things. She
giggled as a nervous housemaid giggles when she tries to explain the breakage
of a pipe.

"I'm very sorry, but you remember I was--I was angry with you before Mr.
Torpenhow went away?"

"You were very angry, child; and on my word I think you had some right to be."

"Then I--but aren't you sure Mr. Torpenhow didn't tell you?"

"Tell me what? Good gracious, what are you making such a fuss about when you
might just as well be giving me another kiss?"

He was beginning to learn, not for the first time in his experience, that
kissing is a cumulative poison. The more you get of it, the more you want.

Bessie gave the kiss promptly, whispering, as she did so, "I was so angry I
rubbed out that picture with the turpentine. You aren't angry, are you?"

"What? Say that again." The man's hand had closed on her wrist.

"I rubbed it out with turps and the knife," faltered Bessie. "I thought you"d
only have to do it over again. You did do it over again, didn't you? Oh, let go
of my wrist; you're hurting me."

"Isn't there anything left of the thing?"

"N'nothing that looks like anything. I'm sorry--I didn't know you"d take on
about it; I only meant to do it in fun. You aren't going to hit me?"

"Hit you! No! Let's think."

He did not relax his hold upon her wrist but stood staring at the carpet.

Then he shook his head as a young steer shakes it when the lash of the stock-
whip cross his nose warns him back to the path on to the shambles that he would
escape. For weeks he had forced himself not to think of the Melancolia, because
she was a part of his dead life. With Bessie's return and certain new prospects
that had developed themselves, the Melancolia--lovelier in his imagination than
she had ever been on canvas--reappeared. By her aid he might have procured more
money wherewith to amuse Bess and to forget Maisie, as well as another taste of
an almost forgotten success. Now, thanks to a vicious little housemaid's folly,
there was nothing to look for--not even the hope that he might some day take an
abiding interest in the housemaid. Worst of all, he had been made to appear
ridiculous in Maisie's eyes. A woman will forgive the man who has ruined her
life's work so long as he gives her love; a man may forgive those who ruin the
love of his life, but he will never forgive the destruction of his work.

"Tck--tck--tck," said Dick between his teeth, and then laughed softly. "It's an
omen, Bessie, and--a good many things considered, it serves me right for doing
what I have done. By Jove! that accounts for Maisie's running away. She must
have thought me perfectly mad--small blame to her! The whole picture ruined,
isn't it so? What made you do it?"

"Because I was that angry. I'm not angry now--I'm awful sorry."

"I wonder.--It doesn't matter, anyhow. I'm to blame for making the mistake."

"What mistake?"

"Something you wouldn't understand, dear. Great heavens! to think that a little
piece of dirt like you could throw me out of stride!" Dick was talking to
himself as Bessie tried to shake off his grip on her wrist.

"I ain't a piece of dirt, and you shouldn't call me so! I did it 'cause I hated
you, and I'm only sorry now 'cause you're 'cause you're----"

"Exactly--because I'm blind. There's noting like tact in little things."

Bessie began to sob. She did not like being shackled against her will; she was
afraid of the blind face and the look upon it, and was sorry too that her great
revenge had only made Dick laugh.

"Don't cry," he said, and took her into his arms. "You only did what you
thought right."

"I--I ain't a little piece of dirt, and if you say that I'll never come to you
again."

"You don't know what you've done to me. I'm not angry--indeed, I'm not. Be
quiet for a minute."

Bessie remained in his arms shrinking. Dick's first thought was connected with
Maisie, and it hurt him as white-hot iron hurts an open sore.

Not for nothing is a man permitted to ally himself to the wrong woman.

The first pang--the first sense of things lost is but the prelude to the play,
for the very just Providence who delights in causing pain has decreed that the
agony shall return, and that in the midst of keenest pleasure.

They know this pain equally who have forsaken or been forsaken by the love of
their life, and in their new wives' arms are compelled to realise it.

It is better to remain alone and suffer only the misery of being alone, so long
as it is possible to find distraction in daily work. When that resource goes
the man is to be pitied and left alone.

These things and some others Dick considered while he was holding Bessie to his
heart.

"Though you mayn't know it," he said, raising his head, "the Lord is a just and
a terrible God, Bess; with a very strong sense of humour. It serves me right--
how it serves me right! Torp could understand it if he were here; he must have
suffered something at your hands, child, but only for a minute or so. I saved
him. Set that to my credit, some one."

"Let me go," said Bess, her face darkening. "Let me go."

"All in good time. Did you ever attend Sunday school?"

"Never. Let me go, I tell you; you're making fun of me."

"Indeed, I'm not. I'm making fun of myself. . . . Thus. "He saved others,
himself he cannot save." It isn't exactly a school-board text." He released her
wrist, but since he was between her and the door, she could not escape. "What
an enormous amount of mischief one little woman can do!"

"I'm sorry; I'm awful sorry about the picture."

"I'm not. I'm grateful to you for spoiling it. . . . What were we talking about
before you mentioned the thing?"

"About getting away--and money. Me and you going away."

"Of course. We will get away--that is to say, I will."

"And me?"

"You shall have fifty whole pounds for spoiling a picture."

"Then you won't----?"

"I'm afraid not, dear. Think of fifty pounds for pretty things all to
yourself."

"You said you couldn't do anything without me."

"That was true a little while ago. I'm better now, thank you. Get me my hat."

"S'pose I don't?"

"Beeton will, and you'll lose fifty pounds. That's all. Get it."

Bessie cursed under her breath. She had pitied the man sincerely, had kissed
him with almost equal sincerity, for he was not unhandsome; it pleased her to
be in a way and for a time his protector, and above all there were four
thousand pounds to be handled by some one. Now through a slip of the tongue and
a little feminine desire to give a little, not too much, pain she had lost the
money, the blessed idleness and the pretty things, the companionship, and the
chance of looking outwardly as respectable as a real lady.

"Now fill me a pipe. Tobacco doesn't taste, but it doesn't matter, and I"ll
think things out. What's the day of the week, Bess?"

"Tuesday."

"Then Thursday's mail-day. What a fool--what a blind fool I have been! Twenty-
two pounds covers my passage home again. Allow ten for additional expenses. We
must put up at Madam Binat's for old time"s sake. Thirty-two pounds altogether.
Add a hundred for the cost of the last trip--Gad, won't Torp stare to see me!--
a hundred and thirty-two leaves seventy-eight for baksheesh--I shall need it--
and to play with. What are you crying for, Bess? It wasn't your fault, child;
it was mine altogether. Oh, you funny little opossum, mop your eyes and take me
out! I want the pass-book and the check-book. Stop a minute. Four thousand
pounds at four per cent--that's safe interest--means a hundred and sixty pounds
a year; one hundred and twenty pounds a year--also safe--is two eighty, and two
hundred and eighty pounds added to three hundred a year means gilded luxury for
a single woman. Bess, we'll go to the bank."

Richer by two hundred and ten pounds stored in his money-belt, Dick caused
Bessie, now thoroughly bewildered, to hurry from the bank to the P. and O.
offices, where he explained things tersely.

"Port Said, single first; cabin as close to the baggage-hatch as possible. What
ship's going?"

"The Colgong," said the clerk.

"She's a wet little hooker. Is it Tilbury and a tender, or Galleons and the
docks?"

"Galleons. Twelve-forty, Thursday."

"Thanks. Change, please. I can't see very well--will you count it into my
hand?"

"If they all took their passages like that instead of talking about their
trunks, life would be worth something," said the clerk to his neighbour, who
was trying to explain to a harassed mother of many that condensed milk is just
as good for babes at sea as daily dairy. Being nineteen and unmarried, he spoke
with conviction.

"We are now," quoth Dick, as they returned to the studio, patting the place
where his money-belt covered ticket and money, "beyond the reach of man, or
devil, or woman--which is much more important. I"ve had three little affairs to
carry through before Thursday, but I needn't ask you to help, Bess. Come here
on Thursday morning at nine. We'll breakfast, and you shall take me down to
Galleons Station."

"What are you going to do?"

"Going away, of course. What should I stay for?"

"But you can't look after yourself?"

"I can do anything. I didn't realise it before, but I can. I've done a great
deal already. Resolution shall be treated to one kiss if Bessie doesn't
object." Strangely enough, Bessie objected and Dick laughed. "I suppose you're
right. Well, come at nine the day after tomorrow and you'll get your money."

"Shall I sure?"

"I don't bilk, and you won't know whether I do or not unless you come. Oh, but
it's long and long to wait! Good-bye, Bessie,--send Beeton here as you go out."

The housekeeper came.

"What are all the fittings of my rooms worth?" said Dick, imperiously.

"'Tisn't for me to say, sir. Some things is very pretty and some is wore out
dreadful."

"I'm insured for two hundred and seventy."

"Insurance policies is no criterion, though I don't say----"

"Oh, damn your longwindedness! You've made your pickings out of me and the
other tenants. Why, you talked of retiring and buying a public-house the other
day. Give a straight answer to a straight question."

"Fifty," said Mr. Beeton, without a moment's hesitation.

"Double it; or I'll break up half my sticks and burn the rest."

He felt his way to a bookstand that supported a pile of sketch-books, and
wrenched out one of the mahogany pillars.

"That's sinful, sir," said the housekeeper, alarmed.

"It's my own. One hundred or----"

"One hundred it is. It'll cost me three and six to get that there pilaster
mended."

"I thought so. What an out and out swindler you must have been to spring that
price at once!"

"I hope I've done nothing to dissatisfy any of the tenants, least of all you,
sir."

"Never mind that. Get me the money tomorrow, and see that all my clothes are
packed in the little brown bullock-trunk. I'm going."

"But the quarter's notice?"

"I'll pay forfeit. Look after the packing and leave me alone."

Mr. Beeton discussed this new departure with his wife, who decided that Bessie
was at the bottom of it all. Her husband took a more charitable view.

"It's very sudden--but then he was always sudden in his ways. Listen to him
now!"

There was a sound of chanting from Dick's room.

"We'll never come back any more, boys,
We'll never come back no more;
We'll go to the deuce on any excuse,
And never come back no more!
Oh say we're afloat or ashore, boys,
Oh say we're afloat or ashore;
But we'll never come back any more, boys,
We'll never come back no more!"

"Mr. Beeton! Mr. Beeton! Where the deuce is my pistol?"

"Quick, he's going to shoot himself 'avin" gone mad!" said Mrs. Beeton.

Mr. Beeton addressed Dick soothingly, but it was some time before the latter,
threshing up and down his bedroom, could realise the intention of the promises
to 'find everything tomorrow, sir.'

"Oh, you copper-nosed old fool--you impotent Academician!" he shouted at last.
"Do you suppose I want to shoot myself? Take the pistol in your silly shaking
hand then. If you touch it, it will go off, because it's loaded. It's among my
campaign-kit somewhere--in the parcel at the bottom of the trunk."

Long ago Dick had carefully possessed himself of a forty-pound weight field-
equipment constructed by the knowledge of his own experience. It was this put-
away treasure that he was trying to find and rehandle. Mr. Beeton whipped the
revolver out of its place on the top of the package, and Dick drove his hand
among the khaki coat and breeches, the blue cloth leg-bands, and the heavy
flannel shirts doubled over a pair of swan-neck spurs. Under these and the
water-bottle lay a sketch-book and a pigskin case of stationery.

"These we don't want; you can have them, Mr. Beeton. Everything else I'll keep.
Pack 'em on the top right-hand side of my trunk. When you've done that come
into the studio with your wife. I want you both. Wait a minute; get me a pen
and a sheet of notepaper."

It is not an easy thing to write when you cannot see, and Dick had particular
reasons for wishing that his work should be clear. So he began, following his
right hand with his left: ""The badness of this writing is because I am blind
and cannot see my pen." H'mph!--even a lawyer can't mistake that. It must be
signed, I suppose, but it needn't be witnessed. Now an inch lower--why did I
never learn to use a type-writer?--"This is the last will and testament of me,
Richard Heldar. I am in sound bodily and mental health, and there is no
previous will to revoke."--That's all right. Damn the pen! Whereabouts on the
paper was I?--"I leave everything that I possess in the world, including four
thousand pounds, and two thousand seven hundred and twenty eight pounds held
for me"--oh, I can't get this straight." He tore off half the sheet and began
again with the caution about the handwriting. Then: "I leave all the money I
possess in the world to"--here followed Maisie"s name, and the names of the two
banks that held the money.

"It mayn't be quite regular, but no one has a shadow of a right to dispute it,
and I've given Maisie's address. Come in, Mr. Beeton. This is my signature; I
want you and your wife to witness it. Thanks. Tomorrow you must take me to the
landlord and I'll pay forfeit for leaving without notice, and I'll lodge this
paper with him in case anything happens while I'm away. Now we're going to
light up the studio stove. Stay with me, and give me my papers as I want 'em."

No one knows until he has tried how fine a blaze a year's accumulation of
bills, letters, and dockets can make. Dick stuffed into the stove every
document in the studio--saving only three unopened letters; destroyed sketch-
books, rough note-books, new and half-finished canvases alike.

"What a lot of rubbish a tenant gets about him if he stays long enough in one
place, to be sure," said Mr. Beeton, at last.

"He does. Is there anything more left?" Dick felt round the walls.

"Not a thing, and the stove's nigh red-hot."

"Excellent, and you've lost about a thousand pounds' worth of sketches. Ho! ho!
Quite a thousand pounds' worth, if I can remember what I used to be."

"Yes, sir," politely. Mr. Beeton was quite sure that Dick had gone mad,
otherwise he would have never parted with his excellent furniture for a song.
The canvas things took up storage room and were much better out of the way.

There remained only to leave the little will in safe hands: that could not be
accomplished til tomorrow. Dick groped about the floor picking up the last
pieces of paper, assured himself again and again that there remained no written
word or sign of his past life in drawer or desk, and sat down before the stove
till the fire died out and the contracting iron cracked in the silence of the
night.

CHAPTER XV

With a heart of furious fancies,
Whereof I am commander;          
With a burning spear and a horse of air,
To the wilderness I wander.

With a knight of ghosts and shadows
I summoned am to tourney--
Ten leagues beyond the wide world's end,
Methinks it is no journey.
          --Tom o' Bedlam's Song

"Goodbye, Bess; I promised you fifty. Here's a hundred--all that I got for my
furniture from Beeton. That will keep you in pretty frocks for some time.
You've been a good little girl, all things considered, but you"ve given me and
Torpenhow a fair amount of trouble."

"Give Mr. Torpenhow my love if you see him, won't you?"

"Of course I will, dear. Now take me up the gang-plank and into the cabin. Once
aboard the lugger and the maid is--and I am free, I mean."

"Who'll look after you on this ship?"

"The head-steward, if there's any use in money. The doctor when we come to Port
Said, if I know anything of P. and O. doctors. After that, the Lord will
provide, as He used to do."

Bess found Dick his cabin in the wild turmoil of a ship full of leavetakers and
weeping relatives. Then he kissed her, and laid himself down in his bunk until
the decks should be clear. He who had taken so long to move about his own
darkened rooms well understood the geography of a ship, and the necessity of
seeing to his own comforts was as wine to him.

Before the screw began to thrash the ship along the Docks he had been
introduced to the head-steward, had royally tipped him, secured a good place at
table, opened out his baggage, and settled himself down with joy in the cabin.
It was scarcely necessary to feel his way as he moved about, for he knew
everything so well. Then God was very kind: a deep sleep of weariness came upon
him just as he would have thought of Maisie, and he slept till the steamer had
cleared the mouth of the Thames and was lifting to the pulse of the Channel.

The rattle of the engines, the reek of oil and paint, and a very familiar sound
in the next cabin roused him to his new inheritance.

"Oh, it's good to be alive again!" He yawned, stretched himself vigorously, and
went on deck to be told that they were almost abreast of the lights of
Brighton. This is no more open water than Trafalgar Square is a common; the
free levels begin at Ushant; but none the less Dick could feel the healing of
the sea at work upon him already. A boisterous little cross-swell swung the
steamer disrespectfully by the nose; and one wave breaking far aft spattered
the quarterdeck and the pile of new deck-chairs. He heard the foam fall with
the clash of broken glass, was stung in the face by a cupful, and sniffing
luxuriously, felt his way to the smoking-room by the wheel. There a strong
breeze found him, blew his cap off and left him bareheaded in the doorway, and
the smoking-room steward, understanding that he was a voyager of experience,
said that the weather would be stiff in the chops off the Channel and more than
half a gale in the Bay. These things fell as they were foretold, and Dick
enjoyed himself to the utmost. It is allowable and even necessary at sea to lay
firm hold upon tables, stanchions, and ropes in moving from place to place. On
land the man who feels with his hands is patently blind. At sea even a blind
man who is not sea-sick can jest with the doctor over the weakness of his
fellows. Dick told the doctor many tales--and these are coin of more value than
silver if properly handled--smoked with him till unholy hours of the night, and
so won his short-lived regard that he promised Dick a few hours of his time
when they came to Port Said.

And the sea roared or was still as the winds blew, and the engines sang their
song day and night, and the sun grew stronger day by day, and Tom the Lascar
barber shaved Dick of a morning under the opened hatch-grating where the cool
winds blew, and the awnings were spread and the passengers made merry, and at
last they came to Port Said.

"Take me," said Dick, to the doctor, "to Madame Binat's--if you know where that
is."

"Whew!" said the doctor, "I do. There's not much to choose between 'em; but I
suppose you're aware that that's one of the worst houses in the place. They'll
rob you to begin with, and knife you later."

"Not they. Take me there, and I can look after myself."

So he was brought to Madame Binat's and filled his nostrils with the well-
remembered smell of the East, that runs without a change from the Canal head to
Hong-Kong, and his mouth with the villainous Lingua Franca of the Levant. The
heat smote him between the shoulder-blades with the buffet of an old friend,
his feet slipped on the sand, and his coat-sleeve was warm as new-baked bread
when he lifted it to his nose.

Madame Binat smiled with the smile that knows no astonishment when Dick entered
the drinking-shop which was one source of her gains. But for a little accident
of complete darkness he could hardly realise that he had ever quitted the old
life that hummed in his ears. Somebody opened a bottle of peculiarly strong
Schiedam. The smell reminded Dick of Monsieur Binat, who, by the way, had
spoken of art and degradation.

Binat was dead; Madame said as much when the doctor departed, scandalised, so
far as a ship's doctor can be, at the warmth of Dick's reception. Dick was
delighted at it. "They remember me here after a year. They have forgotten me
across the water by this time. Madame, I want a long talk with you when you're
at liberty. It is good to be back again."

In the evening she set an iron-topped caf-table out on the sands, and Dick and
she sat by it, while the house behind them filled with riot, merriment, oaths,
and threats. The stars came out and the lights of the shipping in the harbour
twinkled by the head of the Canal.

"Yes. The war is good for trade, my friend; but what dost thou do here? We have
not forgotten thee."

"I was over there in England and I went blind."

"But there was the glory first. We heard of it here, even here--I and Binat;
and thou hast used the head of Yellow 'Tina--she is still alive--so often and
so well that 'Tina laughed when the papers arrived by the mail-boats. It was
always something that we here could recognise in the paintings. And then there
was always the glory and the money for thee."

"I am not poor--I shall pay you well."

"Not to me. Thou hast paid for everything." Under her breath, "Mon Dieu, to be
blind and so young! What horror!"

Dick could not see her face with the pity on it, or his own with the
discoloured hair at the temples. He did not feel the need of pity; he was too
anxious to get to the front once more, and explained his desire.

"And where? The Canal is full of the English ships. Sometimes they fire as they
used to do when the war was here--ten years ago. Beyond Cairo there is
fighting, but how canst thou go there without a correspondent's passport? And
in the desert there is always fighting, but that is impossible also," said she.

"I must go to Suakin." He knew, thanks to Alf's readings, that Torpenhow was at
work with the column that was protecting the construction of the Suakin-Berber
line. P. and O. steamers do not touch at that port, and, besides, Madame Binat
knew everybody whose help or advice was worth anything. They were not
respectable folk, but they could cause things to be accomplished, which is much
more important when there is work toward.

"But at Suakin they are always fighting. That desert breeds men always--and
always more men. And they are so bold! Why to Suakin?"

"My friend is there.

"Thy friend! Chtt! Thy friend is death, then."

Madame Binat dropped a fat arm on the table-top, filled Dick's glass anew, and
looked at him closely under the stars. There was no need that he should bow his
head in assent and say--"No. He is a man, but--if it should arrive . . .
blamest thou?"

"I blame?" she laughed shrilly. "Who am I that I should blame any one--except
those who try to cheat me over their consommations. But it is very terrible."

"I must go to Suakin. Think for me. A great deal has changed within the year,
and the men I knew are not here. The Egyptian lighthouse steamer goes down the
Canal to Suakin--and the post-boats--But even then----"

"Do not think any longer. I know, and it is for me to think. Thou shalt go--
thou shalt go and see thy friend. Be wise. Sit here until the house is a little
quiet--I must attend to my guests--and afterwards go to bed. Thou shalt go, in
truth, thou shalt go."

"Tomorrow?"

"As soon as may be." She was talking as though he were a child.

He sat at the table listening to the voices in the harbour and the streets, and
wondering how soon the end would come, till Madame Binat carried him off to bed
and ordered him to sleep. The house shouted and sang and danced and revelled,
Madame Binat moving through it with one eye on the liquor payments and the
girls and the other on Dick's interests. To this latter end she smiled upon
scowling and furtive Turkish officers of fellaheen regiments, and was more than
kind to camel agents of no nationality whatever.

In the early morning, being then appropriately dressed in a flaming red silk
ball-dress, with a front of tarnished gold embroidery and a necklace of plate-
glass diamonds, she made chocolate and carried it in to Dick.

"It is only I, and I am of discreet age, eh? Drink and eat the roll too. Thus
in France mothers bring their sons, when those behave wisely, the morning
chocolate." She sat down on the side of the bed whispering:--"It is all
arranged. Thou wilt go by the lighthouse boat. That is a bribe of ten pounds
English. The captain is never paid by the Government. The boat comes to Suakin
in four days. There will go with thee George, a Greek muleteer. Another bribe
of ten pounds. I will pay; they must not know of thy money. George will go with
thee as far as he goes with his mules. Then he comes back to me, for his well-
beloved is here, and if I do not receive a telegram from Suakin saying that
thou art well, the girl answers for George."

"Thank you." He reached out sleepily for the cup. "You are much too kind,
Madame."

"If there were anything that I might do I would say, stay here and be wise; but
I do not think that would be best for thee." She looked at her liquor-stained
dress with a sad smile. "Nay, thou shalt go, in truth, thou shalt go. It is
best so. My boy, it is best so."

She stooped and kissed Dick between the eyes. "That is for good-morning," she
said, going away. "When thou art dressed we will speak to George and make
everything ready. But first we must open the little trunk. Give me the keys."

"The amount of kissing lately has been simply scandalous. I shall expect Torp
to kiss me next. He is more likely to swear at me for getting in his way,
though. Well, it won't last long.--Ohe, Madame, help me to my toilette of the
guillotine! There will be no chance of dressing properly out yonder."

He was rummaging among his new campaign-kit, and rowelling his hands with the
spurs. There are two ways of wearing well-oiled ankle-jacks, spotless blue
bands, khaki coat and breeches, and a perfectly pipeclayed helmet. The right
way is the way of the untired man, master of himself, setting out upon an
expedition, well pleased.

"Everything must be very correct," Dick explained. "It will become dirty
afterwards, but now it is good to feel well dressed. Is everything as it should
be?"

He patted the revolver neatly hidden under the fulness of the blouse on the
right hip and fingered his collar.

"I can do no more," Madame said, between laughing and crying. "Look at thyself-
-but I forgot."

"I am very content." He stroked the creaseless spirals of his leggings.

"Now let us go and see the captain and George and the lighthouse boat. Be
quick, Madame."

"But thou canst not be seen by the harbour walking with me in the daylight.
Figure to yourself if some English ladies----"

"There are no English ladies; and if there are, I have forgotten them. Take me
there."

In spite of this burning impatience it was nearly evening ere the lighthouse
boat began to move. Madame had said a great deal both to George and the captain
touching the arrangements that were to be made for Dick's benefit. Very few men
who had the honour of her acquaintance cared to disregard Madame's advice. That
sort of contempt might end in being knifed by a stranger in a gambling hell
upon surprisingly short provocation.

For six days--two of them were wasted in the crowded Canal--the little steamer
worked her way to Suakin, where she was to pick up the superintendent of the
lighthouse; and Dick made it his business to propitiate George, who was
distracted with fears for the safety of his light-of-love and half inclined to
make Dick responsible for his own discomfort. When they arrived George took him
under his wing, and together they entered the red-hot seaport, encumbered with
the material and wastage of the Suakin-Berger line, from locomotives in
disconsolate fragments to mounds of chairs and pot-sleepers.

"If you keep with me," said George, "nobody will ask for passports or what you
do. They are all very busy."

"Yes; but I should like to hear some of the Englishmen talk. They might
remember me. I was known here a long time ago--when I was some one indeed."

"A long time ago is a very long time ago here. The graveyards are full. Now
listen. This new railway runs out so far as Tanai-el-Hassan--that is seven
miles. Then there is a camp. They say that beyond Tanai-el-Hassan the English
troops go forward, and everything that they require will be brought to them by
this line."

"Ah! Base camp. I see. That's a better business than fighting Fuzzies in the
open."

"For this reason even the mules go up in the iron-train."

"Iron what?"

"It is all covered with iron, because it is still being shot at."

"An armoured train. Better and better! Go on, faithful George."

"And I go up with my mules tonight. Only those who particularly require to go
to the camp go out with the train. They begin to shoot not far from the city."

"The dears--they always used to!" Dick snuffed the smell of parched dust,
heated iron, and flaking paint with delight. Certainly the old life was
welcoming him back most generously.

"When I have got my mules together I go up tonight, but you must first send a
telegram of Port Said, declaring that I have done you no harm."

"Madame has you well in hand. Would you stick a knife into me if you had the
chance?"

"I have no chance," said the Greek. "She is there with that woman."

"I see. It's a bad thing to be divided between love of woman and the chance of
loot. I sympathise with you, George."

They went to the telegraph-office unquestioned, for all the world was
desperately busy and had scarcely time to turn its head, and Suakin was the
last place under sky that would be chosen for holiday-ground. On their return
the voice of an English subaltern asked Dick what he was doing. The blue
goggles were over his eyes and he walked with his hand on George's elbow as he
replied--"Egyptian Government--mules. My orders are to give them over to the A.
C. G. at Tanai-el-Hassan. Any occasion to show my papers?"

"Oh, certainly not. I beg your pardon. I'd no right to ask, but not seeing your
face before I----"

"I go out in the train tonight, I suppose," said Dick, boldly. "There will be
no difficulty in loading up the mules, will there?"

"You can see the horse-platforms from here. You must have them loaded up
early." The young man went away wondering what sort of broken-down waif this
might be who talked like a gentleman and consorted with Greek muleteers. Dick
felt unhappy. To outface an English officer is no small thing, but the bluff
loses relish when one plays it from the utter dark, and stumbles up and down
rough ways, thinking and eternally thinking of what might have been if things
had fallen out otherwise, and all had been as it was not.

George shared his meal with Dick and went off to the mule-lines. His charge sat
alone in a shed with his face in his hands. Before his tight-shut eyes danced
the face of Maisie, laughing, with parted lips. There was a great bustle and
clamour about him. He grew afraid and almost called for George.

"I say, have you got your mules ready?" It was the voice of the subaltern over
his shoulder.

"My man's looking after them. The--the fact is I've a touch of ophthalmia and
can't see very well.

"By Jove! that's bad. You ought to lie up in hospital for a while. I've had a
turn of it myself. It's as bad as being blind."

"So I find it. When does this armoured train go?"

"At six o"clock. It takes an hour to cover the seven miles."

"Are the Fuzzies on the rampage--eh?"

"About three nights a week. Fact is I'm in acting command of the night-train.
It generally runs back empty to Tanai for the night."

"Big camp at Tanai, I suppose?"

"Pretty big. It has to feed our desert-column somehow."

"Is that far off?"

"Between thirty and forty miles--in an infernal thirsty country."

"Is the country quiet between Tanai and our men?"

"More or less. I shouldn't care to cross it alone, or with a subaltern"s
command for the matter of that, but the scouts get through it in some
extraordinary fashion."

"They always did."

"Have you been here before, then?"

"I was through most of the trouble when it first broke out."

"In the service and cashiered," was the subaltern's first thought, so he
refrained from putting any questions.

"There's your man coming up with the mules. It seems rather queer----"

"That I should be mule-leading?" said Dick.

"I didn't mean to say so, but it is. Forgive me--it's beastly impertinence I
know, but you speak like a man who has been at a public school. There"s no
mistaking the tone."

"I am a public school man."

"I thought so. I say, I don't want to hurt your feelings, but you're a little
down on your luck, aren't you? I saw you sitting with your head in your hands,
and that's why I spoke."

"Thanks. I am about as thoroughly and completely broke as a man need be."

"Suppose--I mean I'm a public school man myself. Couldn't I perhaps--take it as
a loan y'know and----"

"You're much too good, but on my honour I've as much money as I want.

. . . I tell you what you could do for me, though, and put me under an
everlasting obligation. Let me come into the bogie truck of the train.

There is a fore-truck, isn't there?"

"Yes. How d'you know?"

"I've been in an armoured train before. Only let me see--hear some of the fun I
mean, and I'll be grateful. I go at my own risk as a non-combatant."

The young man thought for a minute. "All right," he said. "We're supposed to be
an empty train, and there's no one to blow me up at the other end."

George and a horde of yelling amateur assistants had loaded up the mules, and
the narrow-gauge armoured train, plated with three-eighths inch boiler-plate
till it looked like one long coffin, stood ready to start.

Two bogie trucks running before the locomotive were completely covered in with
plating, except that the leading one was pierced in front for the muzzle of a
machine-gun, and the second at either side for lateral fire.

The trucks together made one long iron-vaulted chamber in which a score of
artillerymen were rioting.

"Whitechapel--last train! Ah, I see yer kissin" in the first class there!"
somebody shouted, just as Dick was clamouring into the forward truck.

"Lordy! 'Ere's a real live passenger for the Kew, Tanai, Acton, and Ealin'
train. Echo, sir. Speshul edition! Star, sir."--"Shall I get you a foot-
warmer?" said another.

"Thanks. I'll pay my footing," said Dick, and relations of the most amiable
were established ere silence came with the arrival of the subaltern, and the
train jolted out over the rough track.

"This is an immense improvement on shooting the unimpressionable Fuzzy in the
open," said Dick, from his place in the corner.

"Oh, but he's still unimpressed. There he goes!" said the subaltern, as a
bullet struck the outside of the truck. "We always have at least one
demonstration against the night-train. Generally they attack the rear-truck,
where my junior commands. He gets all the fun of the fair."

"Not tonight though! Listen!" said Dick. A flight of heavy-handed bullets was
succeeded by yelling and shouts. The children of the desert valued their
nightly amusement, and the train was an excellent mark.

"Is it worth giving them half a hopper full?" the subaltern asked of the
engine, which was driven by a Lieutenant of Sappers.

"I should think so! This is my section of the line. They'll be playing old
Harry with my permanent way if we don't stop "em."

"Right O!"

"Hrrmph!" said the machine gun through all its five noses as the subaltern drew
the lever home. The empty cartridges clashed on the floor and the smoke blew
back through the truck. There was indiscriminate firing at the rear of the
train, and return fire from the darkness without and unlimited howling. Dick
stretched himself on the floor, wild with delight at the sounds and the smells.

"God is very good--I never thought I'd hear this again. Give 'em hell, men. Oh,
give 'em hell!" he cried.

The train stopped for some obstruction on the line ahead and a party went out
to reconnoitre, but came back, cursing, for spades. The children of the desert
had piled sand and gravel on the rails, and twenty minutes were lost in
clearing it away. Then the slow progress recommenced, to be varied with more
shots, more shoutings, the steady clack and kick of the machine guns, and a
final difficulty with a half-lifted rail ere the train came under the
protection of the roaring camp at Tanai-el-Hassan.

"Now, you see why it takes an hour and a half to fetch her through," said the
subaltern, unshipping the cartridge-hopper above his pet gun.

"It was a lark, though. I only wish it had lasted twice as long. How superb it
must have looked from outside!" said Dick, sighing regretfully.

"It palls after the first few nights. By the way, when you've settled about
your mules, come and see what we can find to eat in my tent. I"m Bennil of the
Gunners--in the artillery lines--and mind you don't fall over my tent-ropes in
the dark."

But it was all dark to Dick. He could only smell the camels, the hay-bales, the
cooking, the smoky fires, and the tanned canvas of the tents as he stood, where
he had dropped from the train, shouting for George. There was a sound of light-
hearted kicking on the iron skin of the rear trucks, with squealing and
grunting. George was unloading the mules.

The engine was blowing off steam nearly in Dick's ear; a cold wind of the
desert danced between his legs; he was hungry, and felt tired and dirty--so
dirty that he tried to brush his coat with his hands. That was a hopeless job;
he thrust his hands into his pockets and began to count over the many times
that he had waited in strange or remote places for trains or camels, mules or
horses, to carry him to his business. In those days he could see--few men more
clearly--and the spectacle of an armed camp at dinner under the stare was an
ever fresh pleasure to the eye. There was colour, light, and motion, without
which no man has much pleasure in living. This night there remained for him
only one more journey through the darkness that never lifts to tell a man how
far he has travelled. Then he would grip Torpenhow's hand again--Torpenhow, who
was alive and strong, and lived in the midst of the action that had once made
the reputation of a man called Dick Heldar: not in the least to be confused
with the blind, bewildered vagabond who seemed to answer to the same name. Yes,
he would find Torpenhow, and come as near to the old life as might be.
Afterwards he would forget everything: Bessie, who had wrecked the Melancolia
and so nearly wrecked his life; Beeton, who lived in a strange unreal city full
of tin-tacks and gas-plugs and matters that no men needed; that irrational
being who had offered him love and loyalty for nothing, but had not signed her
name; and most of all Maisie, who, from her own point of view, was undeniably
right in all she did, but oh, at this distance, so tantalisingly fair.

George's hand on his arm pulled him back to the situation.

"And what now?" said George.

"Oh yes of course. What now? Take me to the camel-men. Take me to where the
scouts sit when they come in from the desert. They sit by their camels, and the
camels eat grain out of a black blanket held up at the corners, and the men eat
by their side just like camels. Take me there!"

The camp was rough and rutty, and Dick stumbled many times over the stumps of
scrub. The scouts were sitting by their beasts, as Dick knew they would. The
light of the dung-fires flickered on their bearded faces, and the camels
bubbled and mumbled beside them at rest. It was no part of Dick's policy to go
into the desert with a convoy of supplies. That would lead to impertinent
questions, and since a blind non-combatant is not needed at the front, he would
probably be forced to return to Suakin.

He must go up alone, and go immediately.

"Now for one last bluff--the biggest of all," he said. "Peace be with you,
brethren!" The watchful George steered him to the circle of the nearest fire.
The heads of the camel-sheiks bowed gravely, and the camels, scenting a
European, looked sideways curiously like brooding hens, half ready to get to
their feet.

"A beast and a driver to go to the fighting line tonight," said Dick.

"A Mulaid?" said a voice, scornfully naming the best baggage-breed that he
knew.

"A Bisharin," returned Dick, with perfect gravity. "A Bisharin without saddle-
galls. Therefore no charge of thine, shock-head."

Two or three minutes passed. Then--"We be knee-haltered for the night. There is
no going out from the camp."

"Not for money?"

"H'm! Ah! English money?"

Another depressing interval of silence.

"How much?"

"Twenty-five pounds English paid into the hand of the driver at my journey's
end, and as much more into the hand of the camel-sheik here, to be paid when
the driver returns."

This was royal payment, and the sheik, who knew that he would get his
commission on this deposit, stirred in Dick's behalf.

"For scarcely one night's journey--fifty pounds. Land and wells and good trees
and wives to make a man content for the rest of his days. Who speaks?" said
Dick.

"I," said a voice. "I will go--but there is no going from the camp."

"Fool! I know that a camel can break his knee-halter, and the sentries do not
fire if one goes in chase. Twenty-five pounds and another twenty-five pounds.
But the beast must be a good Bisharin; I will take no baggage-camel."

Then the bargaining began, and at the end of half an hour the first deposit was
paid over to the sheik, who talked in low tones to the driver.

Dick heard the latter say: "A little way out only. Any baggage-beast will
serve. Am I a fool to waste my cattle for a blind man?"

"And though I cannot see"--Dick lifted his voice a little--"yet I carry that
which has six eyes, and the driver will sit before me. If we do not reach the
English troops in the dawn he will be dead."

"But where, in God's name, are the troops?"

"Unless thou knowest let another man ride. Dost thou know? Remember it will be
life or death to thee."

"I know," said the driver, sullenly. "Stand back from my beast. I am going to
slip him."

"Not so swiftly. George, hold the camel's head a moment. I want to feel his
cheek." The hands wandered over the hide till they found the branded half-
circle that is the mark of the Biharin, the light-built riding-camel.

"That is well. Cut this one loose. Remember no blessing of God comes on those
who try to cheat the blind."

The men chuckled by the fires at the camel-driver's discomfiture. He had
intended to substitute a slow, saddle-galled baggage-colt.

"Stand back!" one shouted, lashing the Biharin under the belly with a quirt.
Dick obeyed as soon as he felt the nose-string tighten in his hand,--and a cry
went up, "Illaha! Aho! He is loose."

With a roar and a grunt the Biharin rose to his feet and plunged forward toward
the desert, his driver following with shouts and lamentation.

George caught Dick's arm and hurried him stumbling and tripping past a
disgusted sentry who was used to stampeding camels.

"What's the row now?" he cried.

"Every stitch of my kit on that blasted dromedary," Dick answered, after the
manner of a common soldier.

"Go on, and take care your throat's not cut outside--you and your dromedary"s."

The outcries ceased when the camel had disappeared behind a hillock, and his
driver had called him back and made him kneel down.

"Mount first," said Dick. Then climbing into the second seat and gently
screwing the pistol muzzle into the small of his companion's back, "Go on in
God's name, and swiftly. Goodbye, George. Remember me to Madame, and have a
good time with your girl. Get forward, child of the Pit!"

A few minutes later he was shut up in a great silence, hardly broken by the
creaking of the saddle and the soft pad of the tireless feet. Dick adjusted
himself comfortably to the rock and pitch of the pace, girthed his belt
tighter, and felt the darkness slide past. For an hour he was conscious only of
the sense of rapid progress.

"A good camel," he said at last.

"He was never underfed. He is my own and clean bred," the driver replied.

"Go on."

His head dropped on his chest and he tried to think, but the tenor of his
thoughts was broken because he was very sleepy. In the half doze in seemed that
he was learning a punishment hymn at Mrs. Jennett's. He had committed some
crime as bad as Sabbath-breaking, and she had locked him up in his bedroom. But
he could never repeat more than the first two lines of the hymn--

When Israel of the Lord believed
Out of the land of bondage came.

He said them over and over thousands of times. The driver turned in the saddle
to see if there were any chance of capturing the revolver and ending the ride.
Dick roused, struck him over the head with the butt, and stormed himself wide
awake. Somebody hidden in a clump of camel-thorn shouted as the camel toiled up
rising ground. A shot was fired, and the silence shut down again, bringing the
desire to sleep. Dick could think no longer. He was too tired and stiff and
cramped to do more than nod uneasily from time to time, waking with a start and
punching the driver with the pistol.

"Is there a moon?" he asked drowsily.

"She is near her setting."

"I wish that I could see her. Halt the camel. At least let me hear the desert
talk."

The man obeyed. Out of the utter stillness came one breath of wind. It rattled
the dead leaves of a shrub some distance away and ceased. A handful of dry
earth detached itself from the edge of a rail trench and crumbled softly to the
bottom.

"Go on. The night is very cold."

Those who have watched till the morning know how the last hour before the light
lengthens itself into many eternities. It seemed to Dick that he had never
since the beginning of original darkness done anything at all save jolt through
the air. Once in a thousand years he would finger the nailheads on the saddle-
front and count them all carefully. Centuries later he would shift his revolver
from his right hand to his left and allow the eased arm to drop down at his
side. From the safe distance of London he was watching himself thus employed,--
watching critically. Yet whenever he put out his hand to the canvas that he
might paint the tawny yellow desert under the glare of the sinking moon, the
black shadow of a camel and the two bowed figures atop, that hand held a
revolver and the arm was numbed from wrist to collar-bone. Moreover, he was in
the dark, and could see no canvas of any kind whatever.

The driver grunted, and Dick was conscious of a change in the air.

"I smell the dawn," he whispered.

"It is here, and yonder are the troops. Have I done well?"

The camel stretched out its neck and roared as there came down wind the pungent
reek of camels in the square.

"Go on. We must get there swiftly. Go on."

"They are moving in their camp. There is so much dust that I cannot see what
they do."

"Am I in better case? Go forward."

They could hear the hum of voices ahead, the howling and the bubbling of the
beasts and the hoarse cries of the soldiers girthing up for the day.

Two or three shots were fired.

"Is that at us? Surely they can see that I am English," Dick spoke angrily.

"Nay, it is from the desert," the driver answered, cowering in his saddle.

"Go forward, my child! Well it is that the dawn did not uncover us an hour
ago."

The camel headed straight for the column and the shots behind multiplied. The
children of the desert had arranged that most uncomfortable of surprises, a
dawn attack for the English troops, and were getting their distance by snap-
shots at the only moving object without the square.

"What luck! What stupendous and imperial luck!" said Dick. "It's 'just before
the battle, mother.' Oh, God has been most good to me! Only"--the agony of the
thought made him screw up his eyes for an instant--"Maisie . . ."

"Allahu! We are in," said the man, as he drove into the rearguard and the camel
knelt.

"Who the deuce are you? Despatches or what? What's the strength of the enemy
behind that ridge? How did you get through?" asked a dozen voices. For all
answer Dick took a long breath, unbuckled his belt, and shouted from the saddle
at the top of a wearied and dusty voice, "Torpenhow! Ohe, Torp! Coo-ee, Tor-
pen-how."

A bearded man raking in the ashes of a fire for a light to his pipe moved very
swiftly towards that cry, as the rearguard, facing about, began to fire at the
puffs of smoke from the hillocks around. Gradually the scattered white
cloudlets drew out into the long lines of banked white that hung heavily in the
stillness of the dawn before they turned over wave-like and glided into the
valleys. The soldiers in the square were coughing and swearing as their own
smoke obstructed their view, and they edged forward to get beyond it. A wounded
camel leaped to its feet and roared aloud, the cry ending in a bubbling grunt.
Some one had cut its throat to prevent confusion. Then came the thick sob of a
man receiving his death-wound from a bullet; then a yell of agony and redoubled
firing.

There was no time to ask any questions.

"Get down, man! Get down behind the camel!"

"No. Put me, I pray, in the forefront of the battle." Dick turned his face to
Torpenhow and raised his hand to set his helmet straight, but, miscalculating
the distance, knocked it off. Torpenhow saw that his hair was gray on the
temples, and that his face was the face of an old man.

"Come down, you damned fool! Dickie, come off!"

And Dick came obediently, but as a tree falls, pitching sideways from the
Bisharin's saddle at Torpenhow's feet. His luck had held to the last, even to
the crowning mercy of a kindly bullet through his head.

Torpenhow knelt under the lee of the camel, with Dick's body in his arms.

 THE END



Volume VII THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS


Preface

To THE ADDRESS OF

CAPTAIN J. MAFFLIN,

Duke of Derry's (Pink) Hussars.

DEAR MAFFLIN,--You will remember that I wrote this story as an Awful Warning.
None the less you have seen fit to disregard it and have followed Gadsby's
example--as I betted you would. I acknowledge that you paid the money at once,
but you have prejudiced the mind of Mrs. Mafflin against myself, for though I
am almost the only respectable friend of your bachelor days, she has been
darwaza band to me throughout the season. Further, she caused you to invite me
to dinner at the Club, where you called me "a wild ass of the desert," and went
home at half-past ten, after discoursing for twenty minutes on the
responsibilities of housekeeping. You now drive a mail-phaeton and sit under a
Church of England clergyman. I am not angry, Jack. It is your kismet, as it was
Gaddy's, and his kismet who can avoid? Do not think that I am moved by a spirit
of revenge as I write, thus publicly, that you and you alone are responsible
for this book. In other and more expansive days, when you could look at a
magnum without flushing and at a cheroot without turning white, you supplied me
with most of the material. Take it back again--would that I could have
preserved your fetterless speech in the telling--take it back, and by your
slippered hearth read it to the late Miss Deercourt. She will not be any the
more willing to receive my cards, but she will admire you immensely, and you, I
feel sure, will love me. You may even invite me to another very bad dinner--at
the Club, which, as you and your wife know, is a safe neutral ground for the
entertainment of wild asses. Then, my very dear hypocrite, we shall be quits.

Yours always,

RUDYARD KIPLING.

P. S.--On second thoughts I should recommend you to keep the book away from
Mrs. Mafflin.


POOR DEAR MAMMA

The wild hawk to the wind-swept sky,
 The deer to the wholesome wold,
And the heart of a man to the heart of a maid,
 As it was in the days of old.
              --Gypsy Song.

SCENE. Interior of Miss MINNIE THREEGAN'S Bedroom at Simla. Miss THREEGAN, in
window-seat, turning over a drawerful of things. Miss EMMA DEERCOURT, bosom--
friend, who has come to spend the day, sitting on the bed, manipulating the
bodice of a ballroom frock, and a bunch of artificial lilies of the valley.
Time, 5:30 P. M. on a hot May afternoon.

Miss DEERCOURT. And he said: "I shall never forget this dance," and, of course,
I said: "Oh, how can you be so silly!" Do you think he meant anything, dear?

Miss THREEGAN. (Extracting long lavender silk stocking from the rubbish.) You
know him better than I do.

Miss D. Oh, do be sympathetic, Minnie! I'm sure he does. At least I would be
sure if he wasn't always riding with that odious Mrs. Hagan.

Miss T. I suppose so. How does one manage to dance through one's heels first?
Look at this--isn't it shameful? (Spreads stocking-heel on open hand for
inspection.)

Miss D. Never mind that! You can't mend it. Help me with this hateful bodice.
I've run the string so, and I've run the string so, and I can't make the
fulness come right. Where would you put this? (Waves lilies of the valley.)

Miss T. As high up on the shoulder as possible.

Miss D. Am I quite tall enough? I know it makes May Older look lopsided.

Miss T. Yes, but May hasn't your shoulders. Hers are like a hock-bottle.

BEARER. (Rapping at door.) Captain Sahib aya.

Miss D. (Jumping up wildly, and hunting for bodice, which she has discarded
owing to the heat of the day.) Captain Sahib! What Captain Sahib? Oh, good
gracious, and I'm only half dressed! Well, I sha'n't bother.

Miss T. (Calmly.) You needn't. It isn't for us. That's Captain Gadsby. He is
going for a ride with Mamma. He generally comes five days out of the seven.

AGONIZED VOICE. (Prom an inner apartment.) Minnie, run out and give Captain
Gadsby some tea, and tell him I shall be ready in ten minutes; and, O Minnie,
come to me an instant, there's a dear girl!

Miss T. Oh, bother! (Aloud.) Very well, Mamma.

Exit, and reappears, after five minutes, flushed, and rubbing her fingers.

Miss D. You look pink. What has happened?

Miss T. (In a stage whisper.) A twenty-four-inch waist, and she won't let it
out. Where are my bangles? (Rummages on the toilet-table, and dabs at her hair
with a brush in the interval.)

Miss D. Who is this Captain Gadsby? I don't think I've met him.

Miss T. You must have. He belongs to the Harrar set. I've danced with him, but
I've never talked to him. He's a big yellow man, just like a newly-hatched
chicken, with an enormous moustache. He walks like this (imitates Cavalry
swagger), and he goes "Ha-Hmmm!" deep down in his throat when he can't think of
anything to say. Mamma likes him. I don"t.

Miss D. (Abstractedly.) Does he wax that moustache?

Miss T. (Busy with Powder-puff.) Yes, I think so. Why?

Miss D. (Bending over the bodice and sewing furiously.) Oh, nothing--only--

Miss T. (Sternly.) Only what? Out with it, Emma.

Miss D. Well, May Olger--she's engaged to Mr. Charteris, you know--said--
Promise you won't repeat this?

Miss T. Yes, I promise. What did she say?

Miss D. That--that being kissed (with a rush) with a man who didn't wax his
moustache was--like eating an egg without salt.

Miss T. (At her full height, with crushing scorn.) May Olger is a horrid, nasty
Thing, and you can tell her I said so. I'm glad she doesn't belong to my set--I
must go and feed this man! Do I look presentable?

Miss D. Yes, perfectly. Be quick and hand him over to your Mother, and then we
can talk. I shall listen at the door to hear what you say to him.

Miss T. 'Sure I don't care. I'm not afraid of Captain Gadsby.

In proof of this swings into the drawing-room with a mannish stride followed by
two short steps, which produces the effect of a restive horse entering. Misses
CAPTAIN GADSBY, who is sitting in the shadow of the window-curtain, and gazes
round helplessly.

CAPTAIN GADSBY. (Aside.) The filly, by Jove! 'Must ha' picked up that action
from the sire. (Aloud, rising.) Good evening, Miss Threegan.

Miss T. (Conscious that she is flushing.) Good evening, Captain Gadsby. Mamma
told me to say that she will be ready in a few minutes. Won't you have some
tea? (Aside.) I hope Mamma will be quick. What am I to say to the creature?
(Aloud and abruptly.) Milk and sugar?

Capt. G. No sugar, tha-anks, and very little milk. Ha-Hmmm.

Miss T. (Aside.) If he's going to do that, I'm lost. I shall laugh. I know I
shall!

Capt. G. (Pulling at his moustache and watching it sideways down his nose.) Ha-
Hmmm. (Aside.) 'Wonder what the little beast can talk about. 'Must make a shot
at it.

Miss T. (Aside.) Oh, this is agonizing. I must say something.

Both Together. Have you Been--

Capt. G. I beg your pardon. You were going to say--

Miss T. (Who has been watching the moustache with awed fascination.) Won't you
have some eggs?

Capt. G. (Looking bewilderedly at the tea-table.) Eggs! (Aside.) O Hades! She
must have a nursery-tea at this hour. S'pose they"ve wiped her mouth and sent
her to me while the Mother is getting on her duds. (Aloud.) No, thanks.

Miss T. (Crimson with confusion.) Oh! I didn't mean that. I wasn't thinking of
mou--eggs for an instant. I mean salt. Won't you have some sa--sweets? (Aside.)
He'll think me a raving lunatic. I wish Mamma would come.

Capt. G. (Aside.) It was a nursery-tea and she's ashamed of it. By Jove! She
doesn't look half bad when she colors up like that. (Aloud, helping himself
from the dish.) Have you seen those new chocolates at Peliti's?

Miss T. No, I made these myself. What are they like?

Capt. G. These! De-licious. (Aside.) And that's a fact.

Miss T. (Aside.) Oh, bother! he'll think I'm fishing for compliments. (Aloud.)
No, Peliti's of course.

Capt. G. (Enthusiastically.) Not to compare with these. How d'you make them? I
can't get my khansamah to understand the simplest thing beyond mutton and fowl.

Miss T. Yes? I'm not a khansamah, you know. Perhaps you frighten him. You
should never frighten a servant. He loses his head. It's very bad policy.

Capt. G. He's so awf'ly stupid.

Miss T. (Folding her hands in her lap.) You should call him quietly and say: 'O
khansamah jee!'

Capt. G. (Getting interested.) Yes? (Aside.) Fancy that little featherweight
saying, 'O khansamah jee' to my bloodthirsty Mir Khan!

Miss T Then you should explain the dinner, dish by dish.

Capt. G. But I can't speak the vernacular.

Miss T. (Patronizingly.) You should pass the Higher Standard and try.

Capt. G. I have, but I don't seem to be any the wiser. Are you?

Miss T. I never passed the Higher Standard. But the khansamah is very patient
with me. He doesn't get angry when I talk about sheep's topees, or order maunds
of grain when I mean seers.

Capt. G. (Aside with intense indignation.) I'd like to see Mir Khan being rude
to that girl! Hullo! Steady the Buffs! (Aloud.) And do you understand about
horses, too?

Miss T. A little--not very much. I can't doctor them, but I know what they
ought to eat, and I am in charge of our stable.

Capt. G. Indeed! You might help me then. What ought a man to give his sais in
the Hills? My ruffian says eight rupees, because everything is so dear.

Miss T. Six rupees a month, and one rupee Simla allowance--neither more nor
less. And a grass-cut gets six rupees. That"s better than buying grass in the
bazar.

Capt. G. (Admiringly.) How do you know?

Miss T. I have tried both ways.

Capt. G. Do you ride much, then? I've never seen you on the Mall.

Miss T. (Aside.) I haven't passed him more than fifty times. (Aloud.) Nearly
every day.
                              
Capt. G. By Jove! I didn't know that. Ha-Hmmm (Pulls at his moustache and is
silent for forty seconds.)

Miss T. (Desperately, and wondering what will happen next.) It looks beautiful.
I shouldn't touch it if I were you. (Aside.) It's all Mamma's fault for not
coming before. I will be rude!

Capt. G. (Bronzing under the tan and bringing down his hand very quickly.) Eh!
Wha-at! Oh, yes! Ha! Ha! (Laughs uneasily.) (Aside.) Well, of all the dashed
cheek! I never had a woman say that to me yet. She must be a cool hand or else-
-Ah! that nursery-tea!

VOICE PROM THE UNKNOWN. Tchk! Tchk! Tchk!

Capt. G. Good gracious! What's that?

Miss T. The dog, I think. (Aside.) Emma has been listening, and I'll never
forgive her!

Capt. G. (Aside.) They don't keep dogs here. (Aloud.) "Didn't sound like a dog,
did it?

Miss T. Then it must have been the cat. Let's go into the veranda. What a
lovely evening it is!

Steps into veranda and looks out across the hills into sunset. The CAPTAIN
follows.

Capt. G. (Aside.) Superb eyes! I wonder that I never noticed them before!
(Aloud.) There's going to be a dance at Viceregal Lodge on Wednesday. Can you
spare me one?

Miss T. (Shortly.) No! I don't want any of your charity-dances. You only ask me
because Mamma told you to. I hop and I bump. You know I do!

Capt. G. (Aside.) That's true, but little girls shouldn't understand these
things. (Aloud.) No, on my word, I don't. You dance beautifully.

Miss T. Then why do you always stand out after half a dozen turns? I thought
officers in the Army didn't tell fibs.

Capt. G. It wasn't a fib, believe me. I really do want the pleasure of a dance
with you.

Miss T. (Wickedly.) Why? Won't Mamma dance with you any more?

Capt. G. (More earnestly than the necessity demands.) I wasn't thinking of your
Mother. (Aside.) You little vixen!

Miss T. (Still looking out of the window.) Eh? Oh, I beg your pardon. I was
thinking of something else.

Capt. G. (Aside.) Well! I wonder what she'll say next. I've never known a woman
treat me like this before. I might b--Dash it, I might be an Infantry
subaltern! (Aloud.) Oh, please don't trouble. I'm not worth thinking about.
Isn't your Mother ready yet?

Miss T. I should think so; but promise me, Captain Gamsby, you won't take poor
dear Mamma twice round Jakko any more. It tires her so.

Capt. G. She says that no exercise tires her.

Miss T. Yes, but she suffers afterward. You don't know what rheumatism is, and
you oughtn't to keep her out so late, when it gets chill in the evenings.

Capt. G. (Aside.) Rheumatism. I thought she came off her horse rather in a
bunch. Whew! One lives and learns. (Aloud.) I'm sorry to hear that. She hasn't
mentioned it to me.

Miss T. (Flurried.) Of course not! Poor dear Mamma never would. And you mustn't
say that I told you either. Promise me that you won't. Oh, Captain Gamsby,
promise me you won't!

Capt. G. I am dumb, or--I shall be as soon as you've given me that dance, and
another--if you can trouble yourself to think about me for a minute.

Miss T. But you won't like it one little bit. You'll be awfully sorry
afterward.

Capt. G. I shall like it above all things, and I shall only be sorry that I
didn't get more. (Aside.) Now what in the world am I saying?

Miss T. Very well. You will have only yourself to thank if your toes are
trodden on. Shall we say Seven?

Capt. G. And Eleven. (Aside.) She can't be more than eight stone, but, even
then, it's an absurdly small foot. (Looks at his own riding boots.)

Miss T. They're beautifully shiny. I can almost see my face in them.

Capt. G. I was thinking whether I should have to go on crutches for the rest of
my life if you trod on my toes.

Miss T. Very likely. Why not change Eleven for a square?

Capt. G. No, please! I want them both waltzes. Won't you write them down?

Miss T. I don't get so many dances that I shall confuse them. You will be the
offender.

Capt. G. Wait and see! (Aside.) She doesn't dance perfectly, perhaps, but--

Miss T. Your tea must have got cold by this time. Won't you have another cup?

Capt. G. No, thanks. Don't you think it's pleasanter out in the veranda?
(Aside.) I never saw hair take that color in the sunshine before. (Aloud.) It's
like one of Dicksee's pictures.

Miss T. Yes I It's a wonderful sunset, isn't it? (Bluntly.) But what do you
know about Dicksee's pictures?

Capt. G. I go Home occasionally. And I used to know the Galleries. (Nervously.)
You mustn't think me only a Philistine with a moustache.

Miss T. Don"t! Please don't. I'm so sorry for what I said then. I was horribly
rude. It slipped out before j thought. Don't you know the temptation to say
frightful and shocking things just for the mere sake of saying them? I'm afraid
I gave way to it.

Capt. G. (Watching the girl as she flushes.) I think I know the feeling. It
would be terrible if we all yielded to it, wouldn't it? For instance, I might
say--

POOR DEAR MAMMA. (Entering, habited, hatted, and booted.) Ah, Captain Gamsby?
'Sorry to keep you waiting. 'Hope you haven't been bored. 'My little girl been
talking to you?

Miss T. (Aside.) I'm not sorry I spoke about the rheumatism. I"m not! I'm NOT!
I only wished I'd mentioned the corns too.

Capt. G. (Aside.) What a shame! I wonder how old she is. It never occurred to
me before. (Aloud.) We've been discussing 'Shakespeare and the musical glasses'
in the veranda.

Miss T. (Aside.) Nice man! He knows that quotation. He isn't a Philistine with
a moustache. (Aloud.) Goodbye, Captain Gadsby. (Aside.) What a huge hand and
what a squeeze! I don't suppose he meant it, but he has driven the rings into
my fingers.

Poor Dear Mamma. Has Vermillion come round yet? Oh, yes! Captain Gadsby, don't
you think that the saddle is too far forward? (They pass into the front
veranda.)

Capt. G. (Aside.) How the dickens should I know what she prefers? She told me
that she doted on horses. (Aloud.) I think it is.

Miss T. (Coming out into front veranda.) Oh! Bad Buldoo! I must speak to him
for this. He has taken up the curb two links, and Vermillion bates that.
(Passes out and to horse's head.)

Capt. G. Let me do it!

Miss. T. No, Vermillion understands me. Don't you, old man? (Loosens curb-chain
skilfully, and pats horse on nose and throttle.) Poor Vermillion! Did they want
to cut his chin off? There!

Captain Gadsby watches the interlude with undisguised admiration.

Poor Dear Mamma. (Tartly to Miss T.) You've forgotten your guest, I think,
dear.

Miss T. Good gracious! So I have! Goodbye. (Retreats indoors hastily.)

Poor Dear Mamma. (Bunching reins in fingers hampered by too tight gauntlets.)
CAPTAIN Gadsby!

CAPTAIN GADSBY stoops and makes the foot-rest. Poor Dear Mamma blunders, halts
too long, and breaks through it.

Capt. G. (Aside.) Can't hold up seven stone forever. It's all your rheumatism.
(Aloud.) Can't imagine why I was so clumsy. (Aside.) Now Little Featherweight
would have gone up like a bird.

They ride out of the garden. The Captain falls back.

Capt. G. (Aside.) How that habit catches her under the arms! Ugh!

Poor Dear Mamma. (With the worn smile of sixteen seasons, the worse for
exchange.) You're dull this afternoon, Captain Gadsby.

Capt. G. (Spurring up wearily.) Why did you keep me waiting so long?

Et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.

(AN INTERVAL OF THREE WEEKS.)

GILDED YOUTH. (Sitting on railings opposite Town Hall.) Hullo, Gadsby! 'Been
trotting out the Gorgonzola! We all thought it was the Gorgon you're mashing.

Capt. G. (With withering emphasis.) You young cub! What the--does it matter to
you?

Proceeds to read GILDED YOUTH a lecture on discretion and deportment, which
crumbles latter like a Chinese Lantern. Departs fuming.

(FURTHER INTERVAL OF FIVE WEEKS.) SCENE. Exterior of New Simla Library on a
foggy evening. Miss THREEGAN and Miss DEERCOURT meet among the 'rickshaws. Miss
T. is carrying a bundle of books under her left arm.

Miss D. (Level intonation.) Well?

Miss T. (Ascending intonation.) Well?

Miss D. (Capturing her friend's left arm, taking away all the books, placing
books in 'rickshaw, returning to arm, securing hand by third finger and
investigating.) Well! You bad girl! And you never told me.

Miss T. (Demurely.) He--he--he only spoke yesterday afternoon.

Miss D. Bless you, dear! And I'm to be bridesmaid, aren't I? You know you
promised ever so long ago.

Miss T. Of course. I'll tell you all about it tomorrow. (Gets into 'rickshaw.)
O Emma!

Miss D. (With intense interest.) Yes, dear?

Miss T. (Piano.) It's quite true--about-the-egg.

Miss D. What egg?

Miss T. (Pianissimo prestissimo.) The egg without the salt. (Forte.) Chalo ghar
ko jaldi, jhampani! (Go home, jhampani.)

THE WORLD WITHOUT

Certain people of importance.

SCENE. Smoking-room of the Degchi Club. Time, 10.30 P. M. of a stuffy night in
the Rains. Four men dispersed in picturesque attitudes and easy-chairs. To
these enter BLAYNE of the Irregular Moguls, in evening dress.

BLAYNE. Phew! The Judge ought to be hanged in his own store-godown. Hi,
khitmatgar! Pour a whiskey-peg, to take the taste out of my mouth.

CURTISS. (Royal Artillery.) That's it, is it? What the deuce made you dine at
the Judge's? You know his bandobust.

Blayne. 'Thought it couldn't be worse than the Club, but I'll swear he buys
ullaged liquor and doctors it with gin and ink (looking round the room.) Is
this all of you tonight?

DOONE. (P.W.D.) Anthony was called out at dinner. Mingle had a pain in his
tummy.

Curtiss. Miggy dies of cholera once a week in the Rains, and gets drunk on
chlorodyne in between. "Good little chap, though. Any one at the Judge"s,
Blayne?

Blayne. Cockley and his memsahib looking awfully white and fagged. "F(".male
girl--couldn'tcatch the name--on her way to the Hills, under the Cockleys"
charge--the Judge, and Markyn fresh from Simla--disgustingly fit.

Curtiss. Good Lord, how truly magnificent! Was there enough ice? When I mangled
garbage there I got one whole lump--nearly as big as a walnut. What had Markyn
to say for himself?

Blayne. "Seems that every one is having a fairly good time up there in spite of
the rain. By Jove, that reminds me! I know I hadn'tcome across just for the
pleasure of your society. News! Great news! Markyn told me.

DOONE. Who's dead now?

Blayne. No one that I know of; but Gadsby's hooked at last!

DROPPING CHORUS. How much? The Devil! Markyn was pulling your leg. Not GADSBY!

Blayne. (Humming.) "Yea, verily, verily, verily! Verily, verily, I say unto
thee." Theodore, the gift 'o God! Our Phillup! It's been given out up above.

MACKESY. (Barrister-at-Law.) Huh! Women will give out anything. What does
accused say?

Blayne. Markyn told me that he congratulated him warily--one hand held out,
t'other ready to guard. Gadsby turned pink and said it was so.

Curtiss. Poor old Caddy! They all do it. Who's she? Let's hear the details.

Blayne. She's a girl--daughter of a Colonel Somebody.

Doone. Simla's stiff with Colonels' daughters. Be more explicit.

Blayne. Wait a shake. What was her name? Thresomething. Three--

Curtiss. Stars, perhaps. Caddy knows that brand.

Blayne. Threegan--Minnie Threegan.

Mackesy. Threegan Isn't she a little bit of a girl with red hair?

Blayne. 'Bout that--from what from what Markyn said.

Mackesy. Then I've met her. She was at Lucknow last season. 'Owned a
permanently juvenile Mamma, and danced damnably. I say, Jervoise, you knew the
Threegans, didn't you?

JERVOISE. (Civilian of twenty-five years' service, waking up from his doze.)
Eh? What's that? Knew who? How? I thought I was at Home, confound you!

Mackesy. The Threegan girl's engaged, so Blayne says.

Jervoise. (Slowly.) Engaged--en-gaged! Bless my soul! I'm getting an old man!
Little Minnie Threegan engaged. It was only the other day I went home with them
in the Surat--no, the Massilia--and she was crawling about on her hands and
knees among the ayahs. 'Used to call me the "Tick Tack Sahib" because I showed
her my watch. And that was in Sixty-Seven--no, Seventy. Good God, how time
flies! I'm an old man. I remember when Threegan married Miss Derwent--daughter
of old Hooky Derwent--but that was before your time. And so the little baby's
engaged to have a little baby of her own! Who's the other fool?

Mackesy. Gadsby of the Pink Hussars.

Jervoise. 'Never met him. Threegan lived in debt, married in debt, and'll die
in debt. 'Must be glad to get the girl off his hands.

Blayne. Caddy has money--lucky devil. Place at Home, too.

Doone. He comes of first-class stock. 'Can't quite understand his being caught
by a Colonel's daughter, and (looking cautiously round room.) Black Infantry at
that! No offence to you, Blayne.

Blayne. (Stiffly.) Not much, thaanks.

Curtiss. (Quoting motto of Irregular Moguls.) "We are what we are," eh, old
man? But Gadsby was such a superior animal as a rule. Why didn't he go Home and
pick his wife there?

Mackesy. They are all alike when they come to the turn into the straight. About
thirty a man begins to get sick of living alone.

Curtiss. And of the eternal mutton--chop in the morning.

Doone. It's a dead goat as a rule, but go on, Mackesy.

Mackesy. If a man's once taken that way nothing will hold him, Do you remember
Benoit of your service, Doone? They transferred him to Tharanda when his time
came, and he married a platelayer's daughter, or something of that kind. She
was the only female about the place.

Doone. Yes, poor brute. That smashed Benoit's chances of promotion altogether.
Mrs. Benoit used to ask "Was you goin' to the dance this evenin'?"

Curtiss. Hang it all! Gadsby hasn't married beneath him. There's no tar-brush
in the family, I suppose.

Jervoise. Tar-brush! Not an anna. You young fellows talk as though the man was
doing the girl an honor in marrying her. You're all too conceited--nothing's
good enough for you.

Blayne. Not even an empty Club, a dam' bad dinner at the Judge's, and a Station
as sickly as a hospital. You're quite right. We're a set of Sybarites.

Doone. Luxurious dogs, wallowing in--

Curtiss. Prickly heat between the shoulders. I'm covered with it. Let's hope
Beora will be cooler.

Blayne. Whew! Are you ordered into camp, too? I thought the Gunners had a clean
sheet.

Curtiss. No, worse luck. Two cases yesterday--one died--and if we have a third,
out we go. Is there any shooting at Beora, Doone?

Doone. The country's under water, except the patch by the Grand Trunk Road. I
was there yesterday, looking at a bund, and came across four poor devils in
their last stage. It's rather bad from here to Kuchara.

Curtiss. Then we're pretty certain to have a heavy go of it. Heigho! I
shouldn't mind changing places with Gaddy for a while. 'Sport with Amaryllis in
the shade of the Town Hall, and all that. Oh, why doesn't somebody come and
marry me, instead of letting me go into cholera-camp?

Mackesy. Ask the Committee.

Curtiss. You ruffian! You'll stand me another peg for that. Blayne, what will
you take? Mackesy is fine on moral grounds. Done, have you any preference?

Doone. Small glass Kummel, please. Excellent carminative, these days. Anthony
told me so.

Mackesy. (Signing voucher for four drinks.) Most unfair punishment. I only
thought of Curtiss as Actaeon being chivied round the billiard tables by the
nymphs of Diana.

Blayne. Curtiss would have to import his nymphs by train. Mrs. Cockley's the
only woman in the Station. She won't leave Cockley, and he's doing his best to
get her to go.

Curtiss. Good, indeed! Here's Mrs. Cockley's health. To the only wife in the
Station and a damned brave woman!

OMNES. (Drinking.) A damned brave woman

Blayne. I suppose Gadsby will bring his wife here at the end of the cold
weather. They are going to be married almost immediately, I believe.

Curtiss. Gadsby may thank his luck that the Pink Hussars are all detachment and
no headquarters this hot weather, or he'd be torn from the arms of his love as
sure as death. Have you ever noticed the thorough-minded way British Cavalry
take to cholera? It's because they are so expensive. If the Pinks had stood
fast here, they would have been out in camp a month ago. Yes, I should
decidedly like to be Gadsby.

Mackesy. He'll go Home after he's married, and send in his papers--see if he
doesn't.

Blayne. Why shouldn't he? Hasn't he money? Would any one of us be here if we
weren't paupers?

Doone. Poor old pauper! What has become of the six hundred you rooked from our
table last month?

Blayne. It took unto itself wings. I think an enterprising tradesman got some
of it, and a shroff gobbled the rest--or else I spent it.

Curtiss. Gadsby never had dealings with a shroff in his life.

Doone. Virtuous Gadsby! If I had three thousand a month, paid from England, I
don't think I'd deal with a shroff either.

Mackesy. (Yawning.) Oh, it's a sweet life! I wonder whether matrimony would
make it sweeter.

Curtiss. Ask Cockley--with his wife dying by inches!

Blayne. Go home and get a fool of a girl to come out to--what is it Thackeray
says?--"the splendid palace of an Indian pro-consul."

Doone. Which reminds me. My quarters leak like a sieve. I had fever last night
from sleeping in a swamp. And the worst of it is, one can't do anything to a
roof till the Rains are over.

Curtiss. What's wrong with you? You haven't eighty rotting Tommies to take into
a running stream.

Doone. No: but I'm mixed boils and bad language. I'm a regular Job all over my
body. It's sheer poverty of blood, and I don't see any chance of getting
richer--either way.

Blayne. Can't you take leave?

Doone. That's the pull you Army men have over us. Ten days are nothing in your
sight. I'm so important that Government can't find a substitute if I go away.
Ye-es, I'd like to be Gadsby, whoever his wife may be.

Curtiss. You've passed the turn of life that Mackesy was speaking of.

Doone. Indeed I have, but I never yet had the brutality to ask a woman to share
my life out here.

Blayne. On my soul I believe you're right. I'm thinking of Mrs. Cockley. The
woman's an absolute wreck.

Doone. Exactly. Because she stays down here. The only way to keep her fit would
be to send her to the Hills for eight months--and the same with any woman. I
fancy I see myself taking a wife on those terms.

Mackesy. With the rupee at one and sixpence. The little Doones would be little
Debra Doones, with a fine Mussoorie
@chi-chi anent
to bring home for the holidays.

Curtiss. And a pair of be-ewtiful sambhur--horns for Doone to wear, free of
expense, presented by--Doone. Yes, it's an enchanting prospect. By the way, the
rupee hasn't done falling yet. The time will come when we shall think ourselves
lucky if we only lose half our pay.

Curtiss. Surely a third's loss enough. Who gains by the arrangement? That's
what I want to know.

Blayne. The Silver Question! I'm going to bed if you begin squabbling Thank
Goodness, here's Anthony--looking like a ghost.

Enter ANTHONY, Indian Medical Staff, very white and tired.

Anthony. 'Evening, Blayne. It's raining in sheets. Whiskey peg lao, khitmatgar.
The roads are something ghastly.

Curtiss. How's Mingle?

Anthony. Very bad, and more frightened. I handed him over to Fewton. Mingle
might just as well have called him in the first place, instead of bothering me.

Blayne. He's a nervous little chap. What has he got, this time?

Anthony. 'Can't quite say. A very bad tummy and a blue funk so far. He asked me
at once if it was cholera, and I told him not to be a fool. That soothed him.

Curtiss. Poor devil! The funk does half the business in a man of that build.

Anthony. (Lighting a cheroot.) I firmly believe the funk will kill him if he
stays down. You know the amount of trouble he"s been giving Fewton for the last
three weeks. He's doing his very best to frighten himself into the grave.

GENERAL CHORUS. Poor little devil! Why doesn't he get away?

Anthony. 'Can't. He has his leave all right, but he's so dipped he can't take
it, and I don't think his name on paper would raise four annas. That's in
confidence, though.

Mackesy. All the Station knows it.

Anthony.  "I suppose I shall have to die here," he said, squirming all across
the bed. He's quite made up his mind to Kingdom Come. And I know he has nothing
more than a wet-weather tummy if he could only keep a hand on himself.

Blayne. That's bad. That's very bad. Poor little Miggy. Good little chap, too.
I say--

Anthony. What do you say?

Blayne. Well, look here--anyhow. If it's like that--as you say--I say fifty.

Curtiss. I say fifty.

Mackesy. I go twenty better.

Doone. Bloated Croesus of the Bar! I say fifty. Jervoise, what do you say? Hi!
Wake up!

Jervoise. Eh? What's that? What's that?

Curtiss. We want a hundred rupees from you. You're a bachelor drawing a
gigantic income, and there's a man in a hole.

Jervoise. What man? Any one dead?

Blayne. No, but he'll die if you don't--give the hundred. Here! Here's a peg-
voucher. You can see what we've signed for, and Anthony's man will come round
tomorrow to collect it. So there will be no trouble.

Jervoise. (Signing.) One hundred, E. M. J. There you are (feebly). It isn't one
of your jokes, is it?

Blayne. No, it really is wanted. Anthony, you were the biggest poker-winner
last week, and you've defrauded the tax-collector too long. Sign!

Anthony. Let's see. Three fifties and a seventy-two twenty-three twenty--say
four hundred and twenty. That'll give him a month clear at the Hills. Many
thanks, you men. I'll send round the chaprassi tomorrow.

Curtiss. You must engineer his taking the stuff, and of course you mustn't--

Anthony. Of course. It would never do. He'd weep with gratitude over his
evening drink.

Blayne. That's just what he would do, damn him. Oh! I say, Anthony, you pretend
to know everything. Have you heard about Gadsby?

Anthony. No. Divorce Court at last?

Blayne. Worse. He's engaged!

Anthony. How much? He can't be!

Blayne. He is. He's going to be married in a few weeks. Markyn told me at the
Judge's this evening. It's pukka.

Anthony. You don't say so? Holy Moses! There'll be a shine in the tents of
Kedar.

Curtiss. 'Regiment cut up rough, think you?

Anthony. 'Don't know anything about the Regiment.

Mackesy. It is bigamy, then?

Anthony. Maybe. Do you mean to say that you men have forgotten, or is there
more charity in the world than I thought?

Doone. You don't look pretty when you are trying to keep a secret. You bloat.
Explain.

Anthony. Mrs. Herriott!

Blayne. (After a long pause, to the room generally.) It's my notion that we are
a set of fools.

Mackesy. Nonsense. That business was knocked on the head last season. Why,
young Mallard--

Anthony. Mallard was a candlestick, paraded as such. Think awhile. Recollect
last season and the talk then. Mallard or no Mallard, did Gadsby ever talk to
any other woman?

Curtiss. There's something in that. It was slightly noticeable now you come to
mention it. But she's at Naini Tal and he's at Simla.

Anthony. He had to go to Simla to look after a globe-trotter relative of his--a
person with a title. Uncle or aunt.

Blayne And there he got engaged. No law prevents a man growing tired of a
woman.

Anthony. Except that he mustn't do it till the woman is tired of him. And the
Herriott woman was not that.

Curtiss. She may be now. Two months of Naini Tal works wonders.

Doone. Curious thing how some women carry a Fate with them. There was a Mrs.
Deegie in the Central Provinces whose men invariably fell away and got married.
It became a regular proverb with us when I was down there. I remember three men
desperately devoted to her, and they all, one after another, took wives.

Curtiss. That's odd. Now I should have thought that Mrs. Deegie's influence
would have led them to take other men's wives. It ought to have made them
afraid of the judgment of Providence.

Anthony. Mrs. Herriott will make Gadsby afraid of something more than the
judgment of Providence, I fancy.

Blayne. Supposing things are as you say, he'll be a fool to face her. He'll sit
tight at Simla.

Anthony. "Shouldn't be a bit surprised if he went off to Naini to explain. He's
an unaccountable sort of man, and she's likely to be a more than unaccountable
woman.

Doone. What makes you take her character away so confidently?

Anthony. Primum tempus. Caddy was her first and a woman doesn't allow her first
man to drop away without expostulation. She justifies the first transfer of
affection to herself by swearing that it is forever and ever. Consequently--

Blayne. Consequently, we are sitting here till past one o'clock, talking
scandal like a set of Station cats. Anthony, it's all your fault. We were
perfectly respectable till you came in. Go to bed. I'm off, Good night all.

Curtiss. Past one! It's past two by Jove, and here's the khit coming for the
late charge. Just Heavens! One, two, three, four, five rupees to pay for the
pleasure of saying that a poor little beast of a woman is no better than she
should be. I'm ashamed of myself. Go to bed, you slanderous villains, and if
I'm sent to Beora tomorrow, be prepared to hear I'm dead before paying my card
account!

THE TENTS OF KEDAR

Only why should it be with pain at all?
Why must I 'twixt the leaves of coronal
Put any kiss of pardon on thy brow?
Why should the other women know so much,
And talk together--Such the look and such
The smile he used to love with, then as now.
          --Any Wife to any Husband.

SCENE. A Naini Tal dinner for thirty-four. Plate, wines, crockery, and
khitmatgars carefully calculated to scale of Rs. 6000 per mensem, less
Exchange. Table split lengthways by bank of flowers.

MRS. HERRIOTT. (After conversation has risen to proper pitch.) Ah! 'Didn't see
you in the crush in the drawing-room. (Sotto voce.) Where have you been all
this while, Pip?

CAPTAIN GADSBY. (Turning from regularly ordained dinner partner and settling
hock glasses.) Good evening. (Sotto voce.) Not quite so loud another time.
You've no notion how your voice carries. (Aside.) So much for shirking the
written explanation. It'll have to be a verbal one now. Sweet prospect! How on
earth am I to tell her that I am a respectable, engaged member of society and
it's all over between us?

MRS. H. I've a heavy score against you. Where were you at the Monday Pop? Where
were you on Tuesday? Where were you at the Lamonts' tennis? I was looking
everywhere.

Capt. G. For me! Oh, I was alive somewhere, I suppose. (Aside.) It's for
Minnie's sake, but it's going to be dashed unpleasant.

Mrs. H. Have I done anything to offend you? I never meant it if I have. I
couldn't help going for a ride with the Vaynor man. It was promised a week
before you came up.

Capt. G. I didn't know--

Mrs. H. It really was.

Capt. G. Anything about it, I mean.

Mrs. H. What has upset you today? All these days? You haven't been near me for
four whole days--nearly one hundred hours. Was it kind of you, Pip? And I've
been looking forward so much to your coming.

Capt. G. Have you?

Mrs. H. You know I have! I've been as foolish as a schoolgirl about it. I made
a little calendar and put it in my card-case, and every time the twelve o"clock
gun went off I scratched out a square and said: "That brings me nearer to Pip.
My Pip!"

Capt. G. (With an uneasy laugh). What will Mackler think if you neglect him so?

Mrs. H. And it hasn't brought you nearer. You seem farther away than ever. Are
you sulking about something? I know your temper.

Capt. G. No.

Mrs. H. Have I grown old in the last few months, then? (Reaches forward to bank
of flowers for menu-card.)

PARTNER ON LEFT. Allow me. (Hands menu-card. Mrs. H. keeps her arm at full
stretch for three seconds.)

Mrs. H. (To partner.) Oh, thanks. I didn't see. (Turns right again.) Is
anything in me changed at all?

Capt. G. For Goodness's sake go on with your dinner! You must eat something.
Try one of those cutlet arrangements. (Aside.) And I fancied she had good
shoulders, once upon a time! What an ass a man can make of himself!

Mrs. H. (Helping herself to a paper frill, seven peas, some stamped carrots and
a spoonful of gravy.) That isn't an answer. Tell me whether I have done
anything.

Capt. G. (Aside.) If it isn't ended here there will be a ghastly scene some-
where else. If only I'd written to her and stood the racket at long range! (To
Khitmatgar.) Han! Simpkin do. (Aloud.) I'll tell you later on.

Mrs. H. Tell me now. It must be some foolish misunderstanding, and you know
that there was to be nothing of that sort between us. We) of all people in the
world, can't afford it. Is it the Vaynor man, and don't you like to say so? On
my honor--

Capt. G. I haven't given the Vaynor man a thought.

Mrs. H. But how d'you know that I haven't?

Capt. G. (Aside.) Here's my chance and may the Devil help me through with it.
(Aloud and measuredly.) Believe me, I do not care how often or how tenderly you
think of the Vaynor man.

Mrs. H. I wonder if you mean that! Oh, what is the good of squabbling and
pretending to misunderstand when you are only up for so short a time? Pip,
don't be a stupid!

Follows a pause, during which he crosses his left leg over his right and
continues his dinner.

Capt. G. (In answer to the thunderstorm in her eyes.) Corns--my worst.

Mrs. H. Upon my word, you are the very rudest man in the world! I'll never do
it again.

Capt. G. (Aside.) No, I don't think you will; but I wonder what you will do
before it's all over. (To Khitmatgar.) Thorah ur Simpkin do.

Mrs. H. Well! Haven't you the grace to apologize, bad man?

Capt. G. (Aside.) I mustn't let it drift back now. Trust a woman for being as
blind as a bat when she won't see.

Mrs. H. I'm waiting; or would you like me to dictate a form of apology?

Capt. G. (Desperately.) By all means dictate.

Mrs. H. (Lightly.) Very well. Rehearse your several Christian names after me
and go on: "Profess my sincere repentance."

Capt. G. "Sincere repentance."

Mrs. H. "For having behaved"--

Capt. G. (Aside.) At last! I wish to Goodness she'd look away. "For having
behaved"--as I have behaved, and declare that I am thoroughly and heartily sick
of the whole business, and take this opportunity of making clear my intention
of ending it, now, henceforward, and forever. (Aside.) If any one had told me I
should be such a blackguard!--

Mrs. H. (Shaking a spoonful of potato chips into her plate.) That's not a
pretty joke.

Capt. G. No. It's a reality. (Aside.) I wonder if smashes of this kind are
always so raw.

Mrs. H. Really, Pip, you're getting more absurd every day.

Capt. G. I don't think you quite understand me. Shall I repeat it?

Mrs. H. No! For pity's sake don't do that. It's too terrible, even in fur.

Capt. G. I'll let her think it over for a while. But I ought to be
horsewhipped.

Mrs. H. I want to know what you meant by what you said just now.

Capt. G. Exactly what I said. No less.

Mrs. H. But what have I done to deserve it? What have I done?

Capt. G. (Aside.) If she only wouldn't look at me. (Aloud and very slowly, his
eyes on his plate.) D'you remember that evening in July, before the Rains
broke, when you said that the end would have to come sooner or later--and you
wondered for which of US it would come first?

Mrs. H. Yes! I was only joking. And you swore that, as long as there was breath
in your body, it should never come. And I believed you.

Capt. G. (Fingering menu-card.) Well, it has. That's all.

A long pause, during which Mrs. H. bows her head and rolls the bread-twist into
little pellets; G. stares at the oleanders.

Mrs. H. (Throwing back her head and laughing naturally.) They train us women
well, don't they, Pip?

Capt. G. (Brutally, touching shirt-stud.) So far as the expression goes.
(Aside.) It isn't in her nature to take things quietly. There'll be an
explosion yet.

Mrs. H. (With a shudder.) Thank you. B-but even Red Indians allow people to
wriggle when they're being tortured, I believe. (Slips fan from girdle and fans
slowly: rim of fan level with chin.)

PARTNER ON LEFT. Very close tonight, isn't it? 'You find it too much for you?

Mrs. H. Oh, no, not in the least. But they really ought to have punkahs, even
in your cool Naini Tal, oughtn't they? (Turns, dropping fan and raising
eyebrows.)

Capt. G. It's all right. (Aside.) Here comes the storm!

Mrs. H. (Her eyes on the tablecloth: fan ready in right hand.) It was very
cleverly managed, Pip, and I congratulate you. You swore--you never contented
yourself with merely Saying a thing--you swore that, as far as lay in your
power, you'd make my wretched life pleasant for me. And you've denied me the
consolation of breaking down. I should have done it--indeed I should. A woman
would hardly have thought of this refinement, my kind, considerate friend.
(Fan-guard as before.) You have explained things so tenderly and truthfully,
too! You haven't spoken or written a word of warning, and you have let me
believe in you till the last minute. You haven't condescended to give me your
reason yet. No! A woman could not have managed it half so well. Are there many
men like you in the world?

Capt. G. I'm sure I don't know. (To Khitmatgar.) Ohe! Simpkin do.

Mrs. H. You call yourself a man of the world, don't you? Do men of the world
behave like Devils when they do a woman the honor to get tired of her?

Capt. G. I'm sure I don't know. Don't speak so loud!

Mrs. H. Keep us respectable, O Lord, whatever happens. Don't be afraid of my
compromising you. You've chosen your ground far too well, and I've been
properly brought up. (Lowering fan.) Haven't you any pity, Pip, except for
yourself?

Capt. G. Wouldn't it be rather impertinent of me to say that I'm sorry for you?

Mrs. H. I think you have said it once or twice before. You're growing very
careful of my feelings. My God, Pip, I was a good woman once! You said I was.
You've made me what I am. What are you going to do with me? What are you going
to do with me? Won't you say that you are sorry? (Helps herself to iced
asparagus.)

Capt. G. I am sorry for you, if you WANT the pity of such a brute as I am. I'm
awf'ly sorry for you.

Mrs. H. Rather tame for a man of the world. Do you think that that admission
clears you?

Capt. G. What can I do? I can only tell you what I think of myself. You can't
think worse than that?

Mrs. H. Oh, yes, I can! And now, will you tell me the reason of all this?
Remorse? Has Bayard been suddenly conscience- stricken?

Capt. G. (Angrily, his eyes still lowered.) No! The thing has come to an end on
my side. That's all. Mafisch!

Mrs. H. "That's all. Mafisch!" As though I were a Cairene Dragoman. You used to
make prettier speeches. D'you remember when you said?--

Capt. G. For Heaven's sake don't bring that back! Call me anything you like and
I'll admit it--

Mrs. H. But you don't care to be reminded of old lies? If I could hope to hurt
you one-tenth as much as you have hurt me tonight--No, I wouldn't--I couldn't
do it--liar though you are.

Capt. G. I've spoken the truth.

Mrs. H. My dear Sir, you flatter yourself. You have lied over the reason. Pip,
remember that I know you as you don't know yourself. You have been everything
to me, though you are--(Fan-guard.) Oh, what a contemptible Thing it is! And so
you are merely tired of me?

Capt. G. Since you insist upon my repeating it--Yes.

Mrs. H. Lie the first. I wish I knew a coarser word. Lie seems so ineffectual
in your case. The fire has just died out and there is no fresh one? Think for a
minute, Pip, if you care whether I despise you more than I do. Simply Mafisch,
is it?

Capt. G. Yes. (Aside.) I think I deserve this.

Mrs. H. Lie number two. Before the next glass chokes you, tell me her name.

Capt. G. (Aside.) I'll make her pay for dragging Minnie into the business!
(Aloud.) Is it likely?

Mrs. H. Very likely if you thought that it would flatter your vanity. You'd cry
my name on the house-tops to make people turn round.

Capt. G. I wish I had. There would have been an end to this business.

Mrs. H. Oh, no, there would not--And so you were going to be virtuous and
blase', were you? To come to me and say: "I've done with you. The incident is
clo-osed." I ought to be proud of having kept such a man so long.

Capt. G. (Aside.) It only remains to pray for the end of the dinner. (Aloud.)
You know what I think of myself.

Mrs. H. As it's the only person in he world you ever do think of, and as I know
your mind thoroughly, I do. You want to get it all over and--Oh, I can't keep
you back! And you're going--think of it, Pip--to throw me over for another
woman. And you swore that all other women were--Pip, my Pip! She can't care for
you as I do. Believe me, she can't. Is it any one that I know?

Capt. G. Thank Goodness it isn't. (Aside.) I expected a cyclone, but not an
earthquake.

Mrs. H. She  can't! Is there anything that I wouldn't do for you--or haven't
done? And to think that I should take this trouble over you, knowing what you
are! Do you despise me for it?

Capt. G. (Wiping his mouth to hide a smile.) Again? It's entirely a work of
charity on your part.

Mrs. H. Ahhh! But I have no right to resent it.--Is she better-looking than I?
Who was it said?--

Capt. G. No--not that!

Mrs. H. I'll be more merciful than you were. Don't you know that all women are
alike?

Capt. G. (Aside.) Then this is the exception that proves the rule.

Mrs. H. All of them! I'll tell you anything you like. I will, upon my word!
They only want the admiration--from anybody--no matter who--anybody! But there
is always one man that they care for more than any one else in the world, and
would sacrifice all the others to. Oh, do listen! I've kept the Vaynor man
trotting after me like a poodle, and he believes that he is the only man I am
interested in. I'll tell you what he said to me.

Capt. G. Spare him. (Aside.) I wonder what his version is.

Mrs. H. He's been waiting for me to look at him all through dinner. Shall I do
it, and you can see what an idiot he looks?

Capt. G. "But what imports the nomination of this gentleman?"

Mrs. H. Watch! (Sends a glance to the Vaynor man, who tries vainly to combine a
mouthful of ice pudding, a smirk of self-satisfaction, a glare of intense
devotion, and the stolidity of a British dining countenance.)

Capt. G. (Critically.) He doesn't look pretty. Why didn't you wait till the
spoon was out of his mouth?

Mrs. H. To amuse you. She'll make an exhibition of you as I've made of him; and
people will laugh at you. Oh, Pip, can't you see that? It's as plain as the
noonday Sun. You'll be trotted about and told lies, and made a fool of like the
others. I never made a fool of you, did I?

Capt. G. (Aside.) What a clever little woman it is!

Mrs. H. Well, what have you to say?

Capt. G. I feel better.

Mrs. H. Yes, I suppose so, after I have come down to your level. I couldn't
have done it if I hadn't cared for you so much. I have spoken the truth.

Capt. G. It doesn't alter the situation.

Mrs. H. (Passionately.) Then she has said that she cares for you! Don't believe
her, Pip. It's a lie--as bad as yours to me!

Capt. G. Ssssteady! I've a notion that a friend of yours is looking at you.

Mrs. H. He! I hate him. He introduced you to me.

Capt. G. (Aside.) And some people would like women to assist in making the
laws. Introduction to imply condonement. (Aloud.) Well, you see, if you can
remember so far back as that, I couldn't, in common politeness, refuse the
offer.

Mrs. H. In common politeness I--We have got beyond that!

Capt. G. (Aside.) Old ground means fresh trouble. (Aloud.) On my honor--

Mrs. H. Your what? Ha, ha!

Capt. G. Dishonor, then. She's not what you imagine. I meant to--

Mrs. H. Don't tell me anything about her! She won't care for you, and when you
come back, after having made an exhibition of yourself, you'll find me occupied
with--

Capt. G. (Insolently.) You couldn't while I am alive. (Aside.) If that doesn't
bring her pride to her rescue, nothing will.

Mrs. H. (Drawing herself up.) Couldn't do it? I--(Softening.) You're right. I
don't believe I could--though you are what you are--a coward and a liar in
grain.

Capt. G. It doesn't hurt so much after your little lecture--with
demonstrations.

Mrs. H. One mass of vanity! Will nothing ever touch you in this life? There
must be a Hereafter if it's only for the benefit of--But you will have it all
to yourself.

Capt. G. (Under his eyebrows.) Are you certain of that?

Mrs. H. I shall have had mine in this life; and it will serve me right,

Capt. G. But the admiration that you insisted on so strongly a moment ago?
(Aside.) Oh, I am a brute!

Mrs. H. (Fiercely.) Will that console me for knowing that you will go to her
with the same words, the same arguments, and the--the same pet names you used
to me? And if she cares for you, you two will laugh over my story. Won't that
be punishment heavy enough even for me--even for me?--And it's all useless.
That's another punishment.

Capt. G. (Feebly.) Oh, come! I'm not so low as you think.

Mrs. H. Not now, perhaps, but you will be. Oh, Pip, if a woman flatters your
vanity, there's nothing on earth that you would not tell her; and no meanness
that you would not do. Have I known you so long without knowing that?

Capt. G. If you can trust me in nothing else--and I don't see why I should be
trusted--you can count upon my holding my tongue.

Mrs. H. If you denied everything you've said this evening and declared it was
all in fun (a long pause), I'd trust you. Not otherwise. All I ask is, don't
tell her my name. Please don't. A man might forget: a woman never would. (Looks
up table and sees hostess beginning to collect eyes.) So it's all ended,
through no fault of mine--Haven't I behaved beautifully? I've accepted your
dismissal, and you managed it as cruelly as you could, and I have made you
respect my sex, haven't I? (Arranging gloves and fan.) I only pray that she'll
know you some day as I know you now. I wouldn't be you then, for I think even
your conceit will be hurt. I hope she'll pay you back the humiliation you've
brought on me. I hope--No. I don't! I can't give you up! I must have something
to look forward to or I shall go crazy. When it's all over, come back to me,
come back to me, and you'll find that you're my Pip still!

Capt. G. (Very clearly.) False move, and you pay for it. It's a girl!

Mrs. H. (Rising.) Then it was true! They said--but I wouldn't insult you by
asking. A girl! I was a girl not very long ago. Be good to her, Pip. I daresay
she believes in you.

Goes out with an uncertain smile. He watches her through the door, and settles
into a chair as the men redistribute themselves.

Capt. G. Now, if there is any Power who looks after this world, will He kindly
tell me what I have done? (Reaching out for the claret, and half aloud.) What
have I done?

WITH ANY AMAZEMENT

And are not afraid with any amazement.
             --Marriage Service.

SCENE.  bachelor's bedroom-toilet-table arranged with unnatural neatness.
CAPTAIN GADSBY asleep and snoring heavily. Time, 10:30 A. M.--a glorious autumn
day at Simla. Enter delicately Captain MAFFLIN of GADSBY's regiment. Looks at
sleeper, and shakes his head murmuring "Poor Gaddy." Performs violent fantasia
with hair-brushes on chairback.

Capt. M. Wake up, my sleeping beauty! (Roars.)
 "Uprouse ye, then, my merry merry men!
 It is our opening day!
 It is our opening da-ay!"
Gaddy, the little dicky-birds have been billing and cooing for ever so long;
and I'm here!

Capt. G. (Sitting up and yawning.) "Mornin". This is awf'ly good of you, old
fellow. Most awf'ly good of you. "Don't know what I should do without you. 'Pon
my soul, I don't. 'Haven't slept a wink all night.

Capt. M. I didn't get in till half-past eleven. 'Had a look at you then, and
you seemed to be sleeping as soundly as a condemned criminal.

Capt. G. Jack, if you want to make those disgustingly worn-out jokes, you'd
better go away. (With portentous gravity.) It's the happiest day in my life.

Capt. M. (Chuckling grimly.) Not by a very long chalk, my son. You're going
through some of the most refined torture you've ever known. But be calm. I am
with you. 'Shun! Dress!

Capt. G. Eh! Wha-at?

Capt. M. Do you suppose that you are your own master for the next twelve hours?
If you do, of course--(Makes for the door.)

Capt. G. No! For Goodness" sake, old man, don't do that! You'll see me through,
won't you? I've been mugging up that beastly drill, and can't remember a line
of it.

Capt. M. (Overturning G.'s uniform.) Go and tub. Don't bother me. I'll give you
ten minutes to dress in.

INTERVAL, filled by the noise as of one splashing in the bath-room..

Capt. G. (Emerging from dressing-room.) What time is it?

Capt. M. Nearly eleven.

Capt. G. Five hours more. O Lord!

Capt. M. (Aside.) 'First sign of funk, that. 'Wonder if it's going to spread.
(Aloud.) Come along to breakfast.

Capt. G. I can't eat anything. I don't want any breakfast.

Capt. M. (Aside.) So early! (Aloud) CAPTAIN Gadsby, I order you to eat
breakfast, and a dashed good breakfast, too. None of your bridal airs and
graces with me!

Leads G. downstairs and stands over him while he eats two chops.

Capt. G. (Who has looked at his watch thrice in the last five minutes.) What
time is it?

Capt. M. Time to come for a walk. Light up.

Capt. G. I haven't smoked for ten days, and I won't now. (Takes cheroot which
M. has cut for him, and blows smoke through his nose luxuriously.) We aren't
going down the Mall, are we?

Capt. M. (Aside.) They're all alike in these stages. (Aloud.) No, my Vestal.
We're going along the quietest road we can find.

Capt. G. Any chance of seeing Her?

Capt. M. Innocent! No! Come along, and, if you want me for the final obsequies,
don't cut my eye out with your stick.

Capt. G. (Spinning round.) I say, isn't She the dearest creature that ever
walked? What's the time? What comes after "wilt thou take this woman"?

Capt. M. You go for the ring. R'c'lect it'll be on the top of my right-hand
little finger, and just be careful how you draw it off, because I shall have
the Verger's fees somewhere in my glove.

Capt. G. (Walking forward hastily.) D--the Verger! Come along! It's past twelve
and I haven't seen Her since yesterday evening. (Spinning round again.) She's
an absolute angel, Jack, and She's a dashed deal too good for me. Look here,
does She come up the aisle on my arm, or how?

Capt. M. If I thought that there was the least chance of your remembering
anything for two consecutive minutes, I'd tell you. Stop passaging about like
that!

Capt. G. (Halting in the middle of the road.) I say, Jack.

Capt. M. Keep quiet for another ten minutes if you can, you lunatic; and walk!

The two tramp at five miles an hour for fifteen minutes.

Capt. G. What's the time? How about the cursed wedding-cake and the slippers?
They don't throw 'em about in church, do they?

Capt. M. Invariably. The Padre leads off with his boots.

Capt. G. Confound your silly soul! Don't make fun of me. I  can't stand it, and
I won't!

Capt. M. (Untroubled.) So-ooo, old horse You'll have to sleep for a couple of
hours this afternoon.

Capt. G. (Spinning round.) I'm not going to be treated like a dashed child.
understand that

Capt. M. (Aside.) Nerves gone to fiddle-strings. What a day we're having!
(Tenderly putting his hand on G.'s shoulder.) My David, how long have you known
this Jonathan? Would I come up here to make a fool of you--after all these
years?

Capt. G. (Penitently.) I know, I know, Jack--but I'm as upset as I can be.
Don't mind what I say. Just hear me run through the drill and see if I've got
it all right:--"To have and to hold for better or worse, as it was in the
beginning, is now, and ever shall be, world without end, so help me God. Amen."

Capt. M. (Suffocating with suppressed laughter.) Yes. That's about the gist of
it. I'll prompt if you get into a hat.

Capt. G. (Earnestly.) Yes, you'll stick by me, Jack, won't you? I"m awfully
happy, but I don't mind telling you that I'm in a blue funk!

Capt. M. (Gravely.) Are you? I should never have noticed it. You don't look
like it.

Capt. G. Don't I? That's all right. (Spinning round.) On my soul and honor,
Jack, She's the sweetest little angel that ever came down from the sky. There
isn't a woman on earth fit to speak to Her.

Capt. M. (Aside.) And this is old Gadsby! (Aloud.) Go on if it relieves you.

Capt. G. You can laugh! That's all you wild asses of bachelors are fit for.

Capt. M. (Drawling.) You never would wait for the troop to come up. You aren't
quite married yet, y'know.

Capt. G. Ugh! That reminds me. I don't believe I shall be able to get into any
boots Let's go home and try 'em on (Hurries forward.)

Capt. M. 'Wouldn't be in your shoes for anything that Asia has to offer.

Capt. G. (Spinning round.) That just shows your hideous blackness of soul--your
dense stupidity--your brutal narrow-mindedness. There's only one fault about
you. You're the best of good fellows, and I don't know what I should have done
without you, but--you aren't married. (Wags his head gravely.) Take a wife,
Jack.

Capt. M. (With a face like a wall.) Ya-as. Whose for choice?

Capt. G. If you're going to be a blackguard, I'm going on--What's the time?

Capt. M. (Hums.)
An' since 'twas very clear we drank only ginger-beer,
Faith, there must ha' been some stingo in the ginger."
Come back, you maniac. I'm going to take you home, and you're going to lie
down.

Capt. G. What on earth do I want to lie down for?

Capt. M. Give me a light from your cheroot and see.

Capt. G. (Watching cheroot-butt quiver like a tuning-fork.) Sweet state I'm in!

Capt. M. You are. I'll get you a peg and you'll go to sleep.

They return and M. compounds a four-finger peg.

Capt. G. O bus! bus! It'll make me as drunk as an owl.

Capt. M. 'Curious thing, 'twon't have the slightest effect on you. Drink it
off, chuck yourself down there, and go to bye-bye.

Capt. G. It's absurd. I sha'n't sleep, I know I sha'n't!

Falls into heavy doze at end of seven minutes. Capt. M. watches him tenderly.

Capt. M. Poor old Gadsby! I've seen a few turned off before, but never one who
went to the gallows in this condition. 'Can't tell how it affects "em, though.
It's the thoroughbreds that sweat when they're backed into double-harness.--And
that's the man who went through the guns at Amdheran like a devil possessed of
devils. (Leans over G.) But this is worse than the guns, old pal--worse than
the guns, isn't it? (G. turns in his sleep, and M. touches him clumsily on the
forehead.) Poor, dear old Gaddy! Going like the rest of 'em--going like the
rest of 'em--Friend that sticketh closer than a brother--eight years. Dashed
bit of a slip of a girl--eight weeks! And--where's your friend? (Smokes
disconsolately till church clock strikes three.)

Capt. M. Up with you! Get into your kit.

Capt. C. Already? Isn't it too soon? Hadn't I better have a shave?

Capt. M. No! You're all right. (Aside.) He'd chip his chin to pieces.

Capt. C. What's the hurry?

Capt. M. You've got to be there first.

Capt. C. To be stared at?

Capt. M. Exactly. You're part of the show. Where's the burnisher? Your spurs
are in a shameful state.

Capt. G. (Gruffly.) Jack, I be damned if you shall do that for me.

Capt. M. (More gruffly.) Dry up and get dressed! If I choose to clean your
spurs, you're under my orders.

Capt. G. dresses. M. follows suit.

Capt. M. (Critically, walking round.) M'--yes, you'll do. Only don"t look so
like a criminal. Ring, gloves, fees--that's all right for me. Let your
moustache alone. Now, if the ponies are ready, we'll go.

Capt. G. (Nervously.) It's much too soon. Let's light up! Let"s have a peg!
Let's--

Capt. M. Let's make bally asses of ourselves!

BELLS. (Without.)--
"Good-peo-ple-all To prayers-we call."

Capt. M. There go the bells! Come on--unless you'd rather not. (They ride off.)

BELLS.--
"We honor the King
And Brides joy do bring--
Good tidings we tell,
And ring the Dead's knell."

Capt. G. (Dismounting at the door of the Church.) I say, aren't we much too
soon? There are no end of people inside. I say, aren't we much too late? Stick
by me, Jack! What the devil do I do?

Capt. M. Strike an attitude at the bead of the aisle and wait for Her. (G.
groans as M. wheels him into position before three hundred eyes.)

Capt. M. (Imploringly.) Gaddy, if you love me, for pity's sake, for the Honor
of the Regiment, stand up! Chuck yourself into your uniform! Look like a man!
I've got to speak to the Padre a minute. (G. breaks into a gentle
Perspiration.) If you wipe your face I'll never be your best man again. Stand
up! (G. trembles visibly.)

Capt. M. (Returning.) She's coming now. Look out when the music starts. There's
the organ beginning to clack.

Bride steps out of 'rickshaw at Church door. G. catches a glimpse of her and
takes heart.

ORGAN.--
"The Voice that breathed o'er Eden,
 That earliest marriage day,
The primal marriage-blessing,
 It hath not passed away."

Capt. M. (Watching G.) By Jove! He is looking well. 'Didn't think he had it in
him.

Capt. G. How long does this hymn go on for?

Capt. M. It will be over directly. (Anxiously.) (Beginning to bleach and gulp.)
Hold on, Gabby, and think 'o the Regiment.

Capt. G. (Measuredly.) I say, there's a big brown lizard crawling up that wall.

Capt. M. My Sainted Mother! The last stage of collapse!

Bride comes up to left of altar, lifts her eyes once to G., who is suddenly
smitten mad.

Capt. G. (To himself again and again.) Little Featherweight's a woman--a woman!
And I thought she was a little girl.

Capt. M. (In a whisper.) Form the halt--inward wheel.

Capt. G. obeys mechanically and the ceremony proceeds.

PADRE. . . . only unto her as ye both shall live?

Capt. G. (His throat useless.) Ha-hmmm!

Capt. M. Say you will or you won't. There's no second deal here.

Bride gives response with perfect coolness, and is given away by the father.

Capt. G. (Thinking to show his learning.) Jack give me away now, quick!

Capt. M. You've given yourself away quite enough. Her right hand, man! Repeat!
Repeat! "Theodore Philip." Have you forgotten your own name?

Capt. G. stumbles through Affirmation, which Bride repeats without a tremor.

Capt. M. Now the ring! Follow the Padre! Don't pull off my glove! Here it is!
Great Cupid, he's found his voice.

Capt. G. repeats Troth in a voice to be heard to the end of the Church and
turns on his heel.

Capt. M. (Desperately.) Rein back! Back to your troop! 'Tisn't half legal yet.

PADRE. . . . joined together let no man put asunder.

Capt. G. paralyzed with fear jibs after Blessing.

Capt. M. (Quickly.) On your own front--one length. Take her with you. I don't
come. You've nothing to say. (Capt. G. jingles up to altar.)

Capt. M. (In a piercing rattle meant to be a whisper.) Kneel, you stiff-necked
ruffian! Kneel!

PADRE. . . whose daughters are ye so long as ye do well and are not afraid with
any amazement.

Capt. M. Dismiss! Break off! Left wheel!

All troop to vestry. They sign.

Capt. M. Kiss Her, Gaddy.

Capt. G. (Rubbing the ink into his glove.) Eh! Wha-at?

Capt. M. (Taking one pace to Bride.) If you don't, I shall.

Capt. G. (Interposing an arm.) Not this journey!

General kissing, in which Capt. G. is pursued by unknown female.

Capt. G. (Faintly to M.) This is Hades! Can I wipe my face now?

Capt. M. My responsibility has ended. Better ask Misses GADSBY.

Capt. G. winces as though shot and procession is Mendelssohned out of Church to
house, where usual tortures take place over the wedding-cake.

Capt. M. (At table.) Up with you, Gaddy. They expect a speech.

Capt. G. (After three minutes" agony.) Ha-hmmm. (Thunders Of applause.)

Capt. M. Doocid good, for a first attempt. Now go and change your kit while
Mamma is weeping over "the Missus." (Capt. G. disappears. Capt. M. starts up
tearing his hair.) It's not half legal. Where are the shoes? Get an ayah.

AYAH. Missie Captain Sahib done gone band karo all the jutis.

Capt. M. (Brandishing scab larded sword.) Woman, produce those shoes! Some one
lend me a bread-knife. We mustn't crack Gaddy"s head more than it is. (Slices
heel off white satin slipper and puts slipper up his sleeve.)

Where is the Bride? (To the company at large.) Be tender with that rice. It's a
heathen custom. Give me the big bag.
* * * * * *

Bride slips out quietly into 'rickshaw and departs toward the sunset.

Capt. M. (In the open.) Stole away, by Jove! So much the worse for Gaddy! Here
he is. Now Gaddy, this'll be livelier than Amdberan! Where's your horse?

Capt. G. (Furiously, seeing that the women are out of an earshot.) Where the
d -'s my Wife?

Capt. M. Half-way to Mahasu by this time. You'll have to ride like Young
Lochinvar.

Horse comes round on his hind legs; refuses to let G. handle him.

Capt. G. Oh you will, will you? Get 'round, you brute--you hog--you beast! Get
round!

Wrenches horse's head over, nearly breaking lower jaw: swings himself into
saddle, and sends home both spurs in the midst of a spattering gale of Best
Patna.

Capt. M. For your life and your love--ride, Gaddy--And God bless you!

Throws half a pound of rice at G. who disappears, bowed forward on the saddle,
in a cloud of sunlit dust.

Capt. M. I've lost old Gaddy. (Lights cigarette and strolls off, singing
absently):--
"You may carve it on his tombstone, you may cut it on his card,
 That a young man married is a young man marred!"

Miss DEERCOURT. (From her horse.) Really, Captain Mafflin! You are more plain
spoken than polite!

Capt. M. (Aside.) They say marriage is like cholera. 'Wonder who'll be the next
victim.

White satin slipper slides from his sleeve and falls at his feet. Left
wondering.

THE GARDEN OF EDEN And ye shall be as--Gods!

SCENE. Thymy grass-plot at back of the Mahasu dak-bungalow, overlooking little
wooded valley. On the left, glimpse of the Dead Forest of Fagoo; on the right,
Simla Hills. In background, line of the Snows. CAPTAIN GADSBY, now three weeks
a husband, is smoking the pipe of peace on a rug in the sunshine. Banjo and
tobacco-pouch on rug. Overhead the Fagoo eagles. Mrs. G. comes out of bungalow.

Mrs. G. My husband!

Capt. G. (Lazily, with intense enjoyment.) Eh, wha-at? Say that again.

Mrs. G. I've written to Mamma and told her that we shall be back on the 17th.

Capt. G. Did you give her my love?

Mrs. G. No, I kept all that for myself. (Sitting down by his side.) I thought
you wouldn't mind.

Capt. G. (With mock sternness.) I object awf'ly. How did you know that it was
yours to keep?

Mrs. G. I guessed, Phil.

Capt. G. (Rapturously.) Lit-tle Featherweight!

Mrs. G. I won" t be called those sporting pet names, bad boy.

Capt. G. You'll be called anything I choose. Has it ever occurred to you,
Madam, that you are my Wife?

Mrs. G. It has. I haven't ceased wondering at it yet.

Capt. G. Nor I. It seems so strange; and yet, somehow, it doesn't.
(Confidently.) You see, it could have been no one else.

Mrs. G. (Softly.) No. No one else--for me or for you. It must have been all
arranged from the beginning. Phil, tell me again what made you care for me.

Capt. G. How could I help it? You were you, you know.

Mrs. G. Did you ever want to help it? Speak the truth!

Capt. G. (A twinkle in his eye.) I did, darling, just at the first. Rut only at
the very first. (Chuckles.) I called you--stoop low and I'll whisper--"a little
beast." Ho! Ho! Ho!

Mrs. G. (Taking him by the moustache and making him sit up.) "A-little-beast!"
Stop laughing over your crime! And yet you had the--the--awful cheek to propose
to me!

Capt. C. I'd changed my mind then. And you weren't a little beast any more.

Mrs. G. Thank you, sir! And when was I ever?

Capt. G. Never! But that first day, when you gave me tea in that peach-colored
muslin gown thing, you looked--you did indeed, dear--such an absurd little
mite. And I didn't know what to say to you.

Mrs. G. (Twisting moustache.) So you said "little beast." Upon my word, Sir! I
called you a "Crrrreature," but I wish now I had called you something worse.

Capt. G. (Very meekly.) I apologize, but you're hurting me awf'ly. (Interlude.)
You're welcome to torture me again on those terms.

Mrs. G. Oh, why did you let me do it?

Capt. G. (Looking across valley.) No reason in particular, but--if it amused
you or did you any good--you might--wipe those dear little boots of yours on
me.

Mrs. G. (Stretching out her hands.) Don't! Oh, don't! Philip, my King, please
don't talk like that. It's how I feel. You're so much too good for me. So much
too good!

Capt. G. Me! I'm not fit to put my arm around you. (Puts it round.)

Mrs. C. Yes, you are. But I--what have I ever done?

Capt. G. Given me a wee bit of your heart, haven't you, my Queen!

Mrs. G. That's nothing. Any one would do that. They cou--couldn'thelp it.

Capt. G. Pussy, you'll make me horribly conceited. Just when I was beginning to
feel so humble, too.

Mrs. G. Humble! I don't believe it's in your character.

Capt. G. What do you know of my character, Impertinence?

Mrs. G. Ah, but I shall, shan't I, Phil? I shall have time in all the years and
years to come, to know everything about you; and there will be no secrets
between us.

Capt. G. Little witch! I believe you know me thoroughly already.

Mrs. G. I think I can guess. You're selfish?

Capt. G. Yes.

Mrs. G. Foolish?

Capt. G. Very.

Mrs. G. And a dear?

Capt. G. That is as my lady pleases.

Mrs. G. Then your lady is pleased. (A pause.) D'you know that we're two solemn,
serious, grown-up people--

Capt. G. (Tilting her straw hat over her eyes.) You grown-up! Pooh! You're a
baby.

Mrs. G. And we're talking nonsense.

Capt. G. Then let's go on talking nonsense. I rather like it. Pussy, I'll tell
you a secret. Promise not to repeat?

Mrs. G. Ye-es. Only to you.

Capt. G. I love you.

Mrs. G. Re-ally! For how long?

Capt. G. Forever and ever.

Mrs. G. That's a long time.

Capt. G. 'Think so? It's the shortest I can do with.

Mrs. G. You're getting quite clever.

Capt. G. I'm talking to you.

Mrs. G. Prettily turned. Hold up your stupid old head and I'll pay you for it.

Capt. G. (Affecting supreme contempt.) Take it yourself if you want it.

Mrs. G. I've a great mind to--and I will! (Takes it and is repaid with
interest.)

Capt. G, Little Featherweight, it's my opinion that we are a couple of idiots.

Mrs. G. We're the only two sensible people in the world. Ask the eagle. He's
coming by.

Capt. G. Ah! I dare say he's seen a good many sensible people at Mahasu. They
say that those birds live for ever so long.

Mrs. G. How long?

Capt. G. A hundred and twenty years.

Mrs. G. A hundred and twenty years! O-oh! And in a hundred and twenty years
where will these two sensible people be?

Capt. G. What does it matter so long as we are together now?

Mrs. G. (Looking round the horizon.) Yes. Only you and I--I and you--in the
whole wide, wide world until the end. (Sees the line of the Snows.) How big and
quiet the hills look! D'you think they care for us?

Capt. G. 'Can't say I've consulted 'em particularly. I care, and that's enough
for me.

Mrs. G. (Drawing nearer to him.) Yes, now--but afterward. What's that little
black blur on the Snows?

Capt. G. A snowstorm, forty miles away. You'll see it move, as the wind carries
it across the face of that spur and then it will be all gone.

Mrs. G. And then it will be all gone. (Shivers.)

Capt. G. (Anxiously.) 'Not chilled, pet, are you? 'Better let me get your
cloak.

Mrs. G. No. Don't leave me, Phil. Stay here. I believe I am afraid. Oh, why are
the hills so horrid! Phil, promise me that you'll always love me.

Capt. G. What's the trouble, darling? I can't promise any more than I have; but
I'll promise that again and again if you like.

Mrs. G. (Her head on his shoulder.) Say it, then--say it! N-no--don't! The--
the--eagles would laugh. (Recovering.) My husband, you've married a little
goose.

Capt. G. (Very tenderly.) Have I? I am content whatever she is, so long as she
is mine.

Mrs. G. (Quickly.) Because she is yours or because she is me mineself?

Capt. G. Because she is both. (Piteously.) I'm not clever, dear, and I don't
think I can make myself understood properly.

Mrs. G. I understand. Pip, will you tell me something?

Capt. G. Anything you like. (Aside.) I wonder what's coming now.

Mrs. G. (Haltingly, her eyes lowered.) You told me once in the old days--
centuries and centuries ago--that you had been engaged before. I didn't say
anything--then.

Capt. G. (Innocently.) Why not?

Mrs. G. (Raising her eyes to his.) Because--because I was afraid of losing you,
my heart. But now--tell about it--please.

Capt. G. There's nothing to tell. I was awf'ly old then--nearly two and twenty-
-and she was quite that.

Mrs. G. That means she was older than you. I shouldn't like her to have been
younger. Well?

Capt. G. Well, I fancied myself in love and raved about a bit, and--oh, yes, by
Jove! I made up poetry. Ha! Ha!

Mrs. G. You never wrote any for me! What happened?

Capt. G. I came out here, and the whole thing went phut. She wrote to say that
there had been a mistake, and then she married.

Mrs. G. Did she care for you much?

Capt. G. No. At least she didn't show it as far as I remember.

Mrs. G. As far as you remember! Do you remember her name? (Hears it and bows
her head.) Thank you, my husband.

Capt. G. Who but you had the right? Now, Little Featherweight, have you ever
been mixed up in any dark and dismal tragedy?

Mrs. G. If you call me Mrs. Gadsby, p'raps I'll tell.

Capt. G. (Throwing Parade rasp into his voice.) Mrs. Gadsby, confess!

Mrs. G. Good Heavens, Phil! I never knew that you could speak in that terrible
voice.

Capt. G. You don't know half my accomplishments yet. Wait till we are settled
in the Plains, and I'll show you how I bark at my troop. You were going to say,
darling?

Mrs. G. I--I don't like to, after that voice. (Tremulously.) Phil, never you
dare to speak to me in that tone, whatever I may do!

Capt. G. My poor little love! Why, you're shaking all over. I am so sorry. Of
course I never meant to upset you Don't tell me anything, I'm a brute.

Mrs. G. No, you aren't, and I will tell--There was a man.

Capt. G. (Lightly.) Was there? Lucky man!

Mrs. G. (In a whisper.) And I thought I cared for him.

Capt. G. Still luckier man! Well?

Mrs. G. And I thought I cared for him--and I didn't--and then you came--and I
cared for you very, very much indeed. That's all. (Face hidden.) You aren't
angry, are you?

Capt. G. Angry? Not in the least. (Aside.) Good Lord, what have I done to
deserve this angel?

Mrs. G. (Aside.) And he never asked for the name! How funny men are! But
perhaps it's as well.

Capt. G. That man will go to heaven because you once thought you cared for him.
'Wonder if you'll ever drag me up there?

Mrs. G. (Firmly.) 'Sha'n't go if you don't.

Capt. G. Thanks. I say, Pussy, I don't know much about your religious beliefs.
You were brought up to believe in a heaven and all that, weren't you?

Mrs. G. Yes. But it was a pincushion heaven, with hymn-books in all the pews.

Capt. G. (Wagging his head with intense conviction.) Never mind. There is a
pukka heaven.

Mrs. G. Where do you bring that message from, my prophet?

Capt. G. Here! Because we care for each other. So it's all right.

Mrs. G. (As a troop of langurs crash through the branches.) So it's all right.
But Darwin says that we came from those!

Capt. G. (Placidly.) Ah! Darwin was never in love with an angel. That settles
it. Sstt, you brutes! Monkeys, indeed! You shouldn't read those books.

Mrs. G. (Folding her hands.) If it pleases my Lord the King to issue
proclamation.

Capt. G. Don't, dear one. There are no orders between us. Only I'd rather you
didn't. They lead to nothing, and bother people's heads.

Mrs. G. Like your first engagement.

Capt. G. (With an immense calm.) That was a necessary evil and led to you. Are
you nothing?

Mrs. G. Not so very much, am I?

Capt. G. All this world and the next to me.

Mrs. G. (Very softly.) My boy of boys! Shall I tell you something?

Capt. G. Yes, if it's not dreadful--about other men.

Mrs. G. It's about my own bad little self.

Capt. G. Then it must be good. Go on, dear.

Mrs. G. (Slowly.) I don't know why I'm telling you, Pip; but if ever you marry
again--(Interlude.) Take your hand from my mouth or I'll bite! In the future,
then remember--I don't know quite how to put it!

Capt. G. (Snorting indignantly.) Don't try. "Marry again," indeed!

Mrs. G. I must. Listen, my husband. Never, never, never tell your wife anything
that you do not wish her to remember and think over all her life. Because a
woman--yes, I am a woman--can't forget.

Capt. G. By Jove, how do you know that?

Mrs. G. (Confusedly.) I don't. I'm only guessing. I am--I was--a silly little
girl; but I feel that I know so much, oh, so very much more than you, dearest.
To begin with, I'm your wife.

Capt. G. So I have been led to believe.

Mrs. G. And I shall want to know every one of your secrets--to share everything
you know with you. (Stares round desperately.)

Capt. G. So you shall, dear, so you shall--but don't look like that.

Mrs. G. For your own sake don't stop me, Phil. I shall never talk to you in
this way again. You must not tell me! At least, not now. Later on, when I'm an
old matron it won't matter, but if you love me, be very good to me now; for
this part of my life I shall never forget! Have I made you understand?

Capt. G. I think so, child. Have I said anything yet that you disapprove of?

Mrs. G. Will you be very angry? That--that voice, and what you said about the
engagement--

Capt. G. But you asked to be told that, darling.

Mrs. G. And that's why you shouldn't have told me! You must be the Judge, and,
oh, Pip, dearly as I love you, I shan't be able to help you! I shall hinder
you, and you must judge in spite of me!

Capt. G. (Meditatively.) We have a great many things to find out together, God
help us both--say so, Pussy--but we shall understand each other better every
day; and I think I'm beginning to see now. How in the world did you come to
know just the importance of giving me just that lead?

Mrs. G. I've told you that I don't know. Only somehow it seemed that, in all
this new life, I was being guided for your sake as well as my own.

Capt. G. (Aside.) Then Mafflin was right! They know, and we--we're blind all of
us. (Lightly.) 'Getting a little beyond our depth, dear, aren't we? I'll
remember, and, if I fail, let me be punished as I deserve.

Mrs. G. There shall be no punishment. We'll start into life together from here-
-you and I--and no one else.

Capt. G. And no one else. (A pause.) Your eyelashes are all wet, Sweet? Was
there ever such a quaint little Absurdity?

Mrs. G. Was there ever such nonsense talked before?

Capt. G. (Knocking the ashes out of his pipe.) 'Tisn't what we say, it's what
we don't say, that helps. And it's all the profoundest philosophy. But no one
would understand--even if it were put into a book.

Mrs. G. The idea! No--only we ourselves, or people like ourselves--if there are
any people like us.

Capt. G. (Magisterially.) All people, not like ourselves, are blind idiots.

Mrs. G. (Wiping her eyes.) Do you think, then, that there are any people as
happy as we are?

Capt. G. 'Must be--unless we've appropriated all the happiness in the world.

Mrs. G. (Looking toward Simla.) Poor dears! Just fancy if we have!

Capt. G. Then we'll hang on to the whole show, for it's a great deal too jolly
to lose--eh, wife 'o mine?

Mrs. G. O Pip! Pip! How much of you is a solemn, married man and how much a
horrid slangy schoolboy?

Capt. G. When you tell me how much of you was eighteen last birthday and how
much is as old as the Sphinx and twice as mysterious, perhaps I'll attend to
you. Lend me that banjo. The spirit moveth me to yowl at the sunset.

Mrs. G. Mind! It's not tuned. Ah! How that jars!

Capt. G. (Turning pegs.) It's amazingly different to keep a banjo to proper
pitch.

Mrs. G. It's the same with all musical instruments, What shall it be?

Capt. G. "Vanity," and let the hills hear. (Sings through the first and half of
the second verse. Turning to Mrs. G.) Now, chorus! Sing, Pussy!
                                                       
BOTH TOGETHER. (Con brio, to the horror of the monkeys who are settling for the
night.)--

"Vanity, all is Vanity," said Wisdom. scorning me--
I clasped my true Love's tender hand and answered frank and free-ee
"If this be Vanity who'd be wise? If this be Vanity who'd be wise?
If this be Vanity who'd be wi-ise (Crescendo.)
Vanity let it be!"

Mrs. G. (Defiantly to the grey of the evening sky.) "Vanity let it be!"

ECHO. (Prom the Fagoo spur.) Let it be!

FATIMA

And you may go in every room of the house and see everything that is there, but
into the Blue Room you must not go.
                     --The Story of Blue Beard.

SCENE. The GADSBYS' bungalow in the Plains. Time, 11 A. M. on a Sunday morning.
Captain GADSBY, in his shirt-sleeves, is bending over a complete set of
Hussar's equipment, from saddle to picketing-rope, which is neatly spread over
the floor of his study. He is smoking an unclean briar, and his forehead is
puckered with thought.

Capt. G. (To himself, fingering a headstall.) Jack's an ass. There's enough
brass on this to load a mule--and, if the Americans know anything about
anything, it can be cut down to a bit only. 'Don't want the watering-bridle,
either. Humbug!--Half a dozen sets of chains and pulleys for one horse! Rot!
(Scratching his head.) Now, let's consider it all over from the beginning. By
Jove, I've forgotten the scale of weights! Never mind. 'Keep the bit only, and
eliminate every boss from the crupper to breastplate. No breastplate at all.
Simple leather strap across the breast--like the Russians. Hi! Jack never
thought of that!

Mrs. G. (Entering hastily, her hand bound in a cloth.) Oh, Pip, I've scalded my
hand over that horrid, horrid Tiparee jam!

Capt. G. (Absently.) Eh! Wha-at?

Mrs. G. (With round-eyed reproach.) I've scalded it aw-fully! Aren't you sorry?
And I did so want that jam to jam properly.

Capt. G. Poor little woman! Let me kiss the place and make it well. (Unrolling
bandage.) You small sinner! Where's that scald? I can't see it.

Mrs. G. On the top of the little finger. There!--It's a most 'normous big burn!

Capt. G. (Kissing little finger.) Baby! Let Hyder look after the jam. You know
I don't care for sweets.

Mrs. G. Indeed?--Pip!

Capt. G. Not of that kind, anyhow. And now run along, Minnie, and leave me to
my own base devices. I'm busy.

Mrs. G. (Calmly settling herself in long chair.) So I see. What a mess you're
making! Why have you brought all that smelly leather stuff into the house?

Capt. G. To play with. Do you mind, dear?

Mrs. G. Let me play too. I'd like it.

Capt. G. I'm afraid you wouldn't. Pussy--Don't you think that jam will burn, or
whatever it is that jam does when it's not looked after by a clever little
housekeeper?

Mrs. G. I thought you said Hyder could attend to it. I left him in the veranda,
stirring--when I hurt myself so.

Capt. G. (His eye returning to the equipment.) Po-oor little woman!--Three
pounds four and seven is three eleven, and that can be cut down to two eight,
with just a lee-tle care, without weakening anything. Farriery is all rot in
incompetent hands. What's the use of a shoe-case when a man's scouting? He 
can't stick it on with a lick--like a stamp--the shoe! Skittles--

Mrs. G. What's skittles? Pah! What is this leather cleaned with?

Capt. G. Cream and champagne and--Look here, dear, do you really want to talk
to me about anything important?

Mrs. G. No. I've done my accounts, and I thought I'd like to see what you're
doing.

Capt. G. Well, love, now you've seen and--Would you mind?--That is to say--
Minnie, I really am busy.

Mrs. G. You want me to go?

Capt. G, Yes, dear, for a little while. This tobacco will hang in your dress,
and saddlery doesn't interest you.

Mrs. G. Everything you do interests me, Pip.

Capt. G. Yes, I know, I know, dear. I'll tell you all about it some day when
I've put a head on this thing. In the meantime--

Mrs. G. I'm to be turned out of the room like a troublesome child?

Capt. G. No-o. I don't mean that exactly. But, you see, I shall be tramping up
and down, shifting these things to and fro, and I shall be in your way. Don't
you think so?

Mrs. G. Can't I lift them about? Let me try. (Reaches forward to trooper's
saddle.)

Capt. G. Good gracious, child, don't touch it. You'll hurt yourself. (Picking
up saddle.) Little girls aren't expected to handle numdahs. Now, where would
you like it put? (Holds saddle above his head.)

Mrs. G. (A break in her voice.) Nowhere. Pip, how good you are--and how strong!
Oh, what's that ugly red streak inside your arm?

Capt. G. (Lowering saddle quickly.) Nothing. It's a mark of sorts. (Aside.) And
Jack's coming to tiffin with his notions all cut and dried!

Mrs. G. I know it's a mark, but I've never seen it before. It runs all up the
arm. What is it?

Capt. G. A cut--if you want to know.

Mrs. G. Want to know! Of course I do! I can't have my husband cut to pieces in
this way. How did it come? Was it an accident? Tell me, Pip.

Capt. G. (Grimly.) No. 'Twasn't an accident. I got it--from a man--in
Afghanistan.

Mrs. G. In action? Oh, Pip, and you never told me!

Capt. G. I'd forgotten all about it.

Mrs. G. Hold up your arm! What a horrid, ugly scar! Are you sure it doesn't
hurt now! How did the man give it you?

Capt. G. (Desperately looking at his watch.) With a knife. I came down--old Van
Loo did, that's to say--and fell on my leg, so I couldn't run. And then this
man came up and began chopping at me as I sprawled.

Mrs. G. Oh, don't, don't! That's enough!--Well, what happened?

Capt. G. I couldn't get to my holster, and Mafflin came round the corner and
stopped the performance.

Mrs. G. How? He's such a lazy man, I don't believe he did.

Capt. G. Don't you? I don't think the man had much doubt about it. Jack cut his
head off.

Mrs. G. Cut-his-head-off! "With one blow," as they say in the books?

Capt. G. I'm not sure. I was too interested in myself to know much about it.
Anyhow, the head was off, and Jack was punching old Van Loo in the ribs to make
him get up. Now you know all about it, dear, and now--

Mrs. G. You want me to go, of course. You never told me about this, though I've
been married to you for ever so long; and you never would have told me if I
hadn't found out; and you never do tell me anything about yourself, or what you
do, or what you take an interest in.

Capt. G. Darling, I'm always with you, aren't I?

Mrs. G. Always in my pocket, you were going to say. I know you are; but you are
always thinking away from me.

Capt. G. (Trying to hide a smile.) Am I? I wasn't aware of it. I'm awf'ly
sorry.

Mrs. G. (Piteously.) Oh, don't make fun of me! Pip, you know what I mean. When
you are reading one of those things about Cavalry, by that idiotic Prince--why
doesn't he be a Prince instead of a stable-boy?

Capt. G. Prince Kraft a stable-boy--Oh, my Aunt! Never mind, dear. You were
going to say?

Mrs. G. It doesn't matter; you don't care for what I say. Only--only you get up
and walk about the room, staring in front of you, and then Mafflin comes in to
dinner, and after I'm in the drawing-room I can hear you and him talking, and
talking, and talking, about things I can't understand, and--oh, I get so tired
and feel so lonely!--I don't want to complain and be a trouble, Pip; but I do
indeed I do!

Capt. G. My poor darling! I never thought of that. Why don't you ask some nice
people in to dinner?

Mrs. G. Nice people! Where am I to find them? Horrid frumps! And if I did, I
shouldn't be amused. You know I only want you.

Capt. G. And you have me surely, Sweetheart?

Mrs. G. I have not! Pip why don't you take me into your life?

Capt. G. More than I do? That would be difficult, dear.

Mrs. G. Yes, I suppose it would--to you. I'm no help to you--no companion to
you; and you like to have it so.

Capt. G. Aren't you a little unreasonable, Pussy?

Mrs. G. (Stamping her foot.) I'm the most reasonable woman in the world--when
I'm treated properly.

Capt. G. And since when have I been treating you improperly?

Mrs. G. Always--and since the beginning. You know you have.

Capt. G. I don't; but I'm willing to be convinced.

Mrs. G. (Pointing to saddlery.) There!

Capt. G. How do you mean?

Mrs. G. What does all that mean? Why am I not to be told? Is it so precious?

Capt. G. I forget its exact Government value just at present. It means that it
is a great deal too heavy.

Mrs. G. Then why do you touch it?

Capt. G. To make it lighter. See here, little love, I've one notion and Jack
has another, but we are both agreed that all this equipment is about thirty
pounds too heavy. The thing is how to cut it down without weakening any part of
it, and, at the same time, allowing the trooper to carry everything he wants
for his own comfort--socks and shirts and things of that kind.

Mrs. G. Why doesn't he pack them in a little trunk?

Capt. G. (Kissing her.) Oh, you darling! Pack them in a little trunk, indeed!
Hussars don't carry trunks, and it's a most important thing to make the horse
do all the carrying.

Mrs. G. But why need you bother about it? You're not a trooper.

Capt. G. No; but I command a few score of him; and equipment is nearly
everything in these days.

Mrs. G. More than me?

Capt. G. Stupid! Of course not; but it's a matter that I'm tremendously
interested in, because if I or Jack, or I and Jack, work out some sort of
lighter saddlery and all that, it's possible that we may get it adopted.

Mrs. G. How?

Capt. G. Sanctioned at Home, where they will make a sealed pattern--a pattern
that all the saddlers must copy--and so it will be used by all the regiments.

Mrs. G. And that interests you?

Capt. G. It's part of my profession, y'know, and my profession is a good deal
to me. Everything in a soldier's equipment is important, and if we can improve
that equipment, so much the better for the soldiers and for us.

Mrs. G. Who's "us"?

Capt. G. Jack and I; only Jack's notions are too radical. What's that big sigh
for, Minnie?

Mrs. G. Oh, nothing--and you've kept all this a secret from me! Why?

Capt. G. Not a secret, exactly, dear. I didn't say anything about it to you
because I didn't think it would amuse you.

Mrs. G. And am I only made to be amused?

Capt. G. No, of course. I merely mean that it couldn't interest you.

Mrs. G. It's your work and--and if you'd let me, I'd count all these things up.
If they are too heavy, you know by how much they are too heavy, and you must
have a list of things made out to your scale of lightness, and--

Capt. G. I have got both scales somewhere in my head; but it's hard to tell how
light you can make a head-stall, for instance, until you've actually had a
model made.

Mrs. G. But if you read out the list, I could copy it down, and pin it up there
just above your table. Wouldn't that do?

Capt. G. It would be awf'ly nice, dear, but it would be giving you trouble for
nothing. I can't work that way. I go by rule of thumb. I know the present scale
of weights, and the other one--the one that I'm trying to work to--will shift
and vary so much that I couldn't be certain, even if I wrote it down.

Mrs. G. I'm so sorry. I thought I might help. Is there anything else that I
could be of use in?

Capt. G. (Looking round the room.) I can't think of anything. You're always
helping me you know.

Mrs. G. Am I? How?

Capt. G. You are of course, and as long as you're near me--I  can't explain
exactly, but it's in the air.

Mrs. G. And that's why you wanted to send me away?

Capt. G. That's only when I'm trying to do work--grubby work like this.

Mrs. G. Mafflin's better, then, isn't he?

Capt. G. (Rashly.) Of course he is. Jack and I have been thinking along the
same groove for two or three years about this equipment. It's our hobby, and it
may really be useful some day.

Mrs. G. (After a pause.) And that's all that you have away from me?

Capt. G. It isn't very far away from you now. Take care the oil on that bit
doesn't come off on your dress.

Mrs. G. I wish--I wish so much that I could really help you. I believe I could-
-if I left the room. But that's not what I mean.

Capt. G. (Aside.) Give me patience! I wish she would go. (Aloud.) I assure you
you can't do anything for me, Minnie, and I must really settle down to this.
Where's my pouch?

Mrs. G. (Crossing to writing-table.) Here you are, Bear. What a mess you keep
your table in!

Capt. G. Don' ttouch it. There's a method in my madness, though you mightn't
think of it.

Mrs. G. (At table.) I want to look - Do you keep accounts, Pip?

Capt. G. (Bending over saddlery.) Of a sort. Are you rummaging among the Troop
papers? Be careful.

Mrs. G. Why? I sha'n't disturb anything. Good gracious! I had no idea that you
had anything to do with so many sick horses.

Capt. G. 'Wish I hadn't, but they insist on falling sick. Minnie, if 1 were you
I really should not investigate those papers. You may come across something
that you won't like.

Mrs. G. Why will you always treat me like a child? I know I'm not displacing
the horrid things.

Capt. G. (Resignedly.) Very well, then. Don't blame me if anything happens.
Play with the table and let me go on with the saddlery. (Slipping hand into
trousers-pocket.) Oh, the deuce!

Mrs. G. (Her back to G.) What's that for?

Capt. G. Nothing. (Aside.) There's not much in it, but I wish I'd torn it up.

Mrs. G. (Turning over contents of table.) I know you'll hate me for this; but I
do want to see what your work is like. (A pause.) Pip, what are "farcybuds"?

Capt. G. Hah! Would you really like to know? They aren't pretty things.

Mrs. G. This Journal of Veterinary Science says they are of "absorbing
interest." Tell me.

Capt. G. (Aside.) It may turn her attention.

Gives a long and designedly loathsome account of glanders and farcy.

Mrs. G. Oh, that's enough. Don't go on!

Capt. G. But you wanted to know--Then these things suppurate and matterate and
spread--

Mrs. G. Pin, you're making me sick! You're a horrid, disgusting schoolboy.

Capt. G. (On his knees among the bridles.) You asked to be told. It's not my
fault if you worry me into talking about horrors.

Mrs. G. Why didn't you say No?

Capt. G. Good Heavens, child! Have you come in here simply to bully me?

Mrs. G. I bully you? How could I! You're so strong. (Hysterically.) Strong
enough to pick me up and put me outside the door and leave me there to cry.
Aren't you?

Capt. G. It seems to me that you're an irrational little baby. Are you quite
well?

Mrs. G. Do I look ill? (Returning to table). Who is your lady friend with the
big grey envelope and the fat monogram outside?

Capt. G. (Aside.) Then it wasn't locked up, confound it. (Aloud.) "God made
her, therefore let her pass for a woman." You remember what farcybuds are like?

Mrs. G. (Showing envelope.) This has nothing to do with them. I'm going to open
it. May I?

Capt. G. Certainly, if you want to. I'd sooner you didn't though. I don't ask
to look at your letters to the Deercourt girl.

Mrs. G. You'd better not, Sir! (Takes letter from envelope.) Now, may I look?
If you say no, I shall cry.

Capt. G. You've never cried in my knowledge of you, and I don't believe you
could.

Mrs. G. I feel very like it today, Pip. Don't be hard on me. (Reads letter.) It
begins in the middle, without any "Dear Captain Gadsby," or anything. How
funny!

Capt. G. (Aside.) No, it's not Dear Captain Gadsby, or anything, now. How
funny!

Mrs. G. What a strange letter! (Reads.) "And so the moth has come too near the
candle at last, and has been singed into--shall I say Respectability? I
congratulate him, and hope he will be as happy as he deserves to be." What does
that mean? Is she congratulating you about our marriage?

Capt. G. Yes, I suppose so.

Mrs. G. (Still reading letter.) She seems to be a particular friend of yours.

Capt. G. Yes. She was an excellent matron of sorts--a Mrs. Herriott--wife of a
Colonel Herriott. I used to know some of her people at Home long ago--before I
came out.

Mrs. G. Some Colonel's wives are young--as young as me. I knew one who was
younger.

Capt. G. Then it couldn't have been Mrs. Herriott. She was old enough to have
been your mother, dear.

Mrs. G. I remember now. Mrs. Scargill was talking about her at the Dutfins'
tennis, before you came for me, on Tuesday. Captain Mafflin said she was a
"dear old woman." Do you know, I think Mafflin is a very clumsy man with his
feet.

Capt. G. (Aside.) Good old Jack! (Aloud.) Why, dear?

Mrs. G. He had put his cup down on the ground then, and he literally stepped
into it. Some of the tea spirted over my dress--the grey one. I meant to tell
you about it before.

Capt. G. (Aside.) There are the makings of a strategist about Jack though his
methods are coarse. (Aloud.) You'd better get a new dress, then. (Aside.) Let
us pray that that will turn her.

Mrs. G. Oh, it isn't stained in the least. I only thought that I'd tell you.
(Returning to letter.) What an extraordinary person! (Reads.) "But need I
remind you that you have taken upon yourself a charge of wardship"--what in the
world is a charge of wardship?--"which as you yourself know, may end in
Consequences"--

Capt. G. (Aside.) It's safest to let em see everything as they come across it;
but 'seems to me that there are exceptions to the rule. (Aloud.) I told you
that there was nothing to be gained from rearranging my table.

Mrs. G. (Absently.) What does the woman mean? She goes on talking about
Consequences--" "almost inevitable Consequences" with a capital C--for half a
page. (Flushing scarlet.) Oh, good gracious! How abominable!

Capt. G. (Promptly.) Do you think so? Doesn't it show a sort of motherly
interest in us? (Aside.) Thank Heaven. Harry always wrapped her meaning up
safely! (Aloud.) Is it absolutely necessary to go on with the letter, darling?

Mrs. G. It's impertinent--it's simply horrid. What right has this woman to
write in this way to you? She oughtn't to.

Capt. G. When you write to the Deercourt girl, I notice that you generally fill
three or four sheets. Can't you let an old woman babble on paper once in a way?
She means well.

Mrs. G. I don't care. She shouldn't write, and if she did, you ought to have
shown me her letter.

Capt. G. Can't you understand why I kept it to myself, or must I explain at
length--as I explained the farcybuds?

Mrs. G. (Furiously.) Pip I hate you! This is as bad as those idiotic saddle-
bags on the floor. Never mind whether it would please me or not, you ought to
have given it to me to read.

Capt. G. It comes to the same thing. You took it yourself.

Mrs. G. Yes, but if I hadn't taken it, you wouldn't have said a word. I think
this Harriet Herriott--it's like a name in a book--is an interfering old Thing.

Capt. G. (Aside.) So long as you thoroughly understand that she is old, I don't
much care what you think. (Aloud.) Very good, dear. Would you like to write and
tell her so? She's seven thousand miles away.

Mrs. G. I don't want to have anything to do with her, but you ought to have
told me. (Turning to last page of letter.) And she patronizes me, too. I've
never seen her! (Reads.) "I do not know how the world stands with you; in all
human probability I shall never know; but whatever I may have said before, I
pray for her sake more than for yours that all may be well. I have learned what
misery means, and I dare not wish that any one dear to you should share my
knowledge."

Capt. G. Good God! Can't you leave that letter alone, or, at least, can't you
refrain from reading it aloud? I've been through it once. Put it back on the
desk. Do you hear me?

Mrs. G. (Irresolutely.) I sh-sha'n't! (Looks at G.'s eyes.) Oh, Pip, please! I
didn't mean to make you angry--'Deed, I didn't. Pip, I'm so sorry. I know I've
wasted your time--

Capt. G. (Grimly.) You have. Now, will you be good enough to go--if there is
nothing more in my room that you are anxious to pry into?

Mrs. G. (Putting out her hands.) Oh, Pip, don't look at me like that! I've
never seen you look like that before and it hu-urts me! I'm sorry. I oughtn't
to have been here at all, and--and--and--(sobbing.) Oh, be good to me! Be good
to me! There's only you--anywhere! Breaks down in long chair, hiding face in
cushions.

Capt. G. (Aside.) She doesn't know how she flicked me on the raw. (Aloud,
bending over chair.) I didn't mean to be harsh, dear--I didn't really. You can
stay here as long as you please, and do what you please. Don't cry like that.
You'll make yourself sick. (Aside.) What on earth has come over her? (Aloud.)
Darling, what's the matter with you?

Mrs. G. (Her face still hidden.) Let me go--let me go to my own room. Only--
only say you aren't angry with me.

Capt. G. Angry with you, love! Of course not. I was angry with myself. I'd lost
my temper over the saddlery--Don't hide your face, Pussy. I want to kiss it.

Bends lower, Mrs. G. slides right arm round his neck. Several interludes and
much sobbing.

Mrs. G. (In a whisper.) I didn't mean about the jam when I came in to tell you-
-

CAPT. G. Bother the jam and the equipment! (Interlude.)

Mrs. G. (Still more faintly.) My finger wasn't scalded at all. I--[ wanted to
speak to you about--about--something else, and--I didn't know how.

Capt. G. Speak away, then. (Looking into her eyes.) Eh! Wha-at? Minnie! Here,
don't go away! You don't mean?

Mrs. G. (Hysterically, backing to portiere and hiding her face in its folds.)
The--the Almost Inevitable Consequences! (Flits through portiere as G. attempts
to catch her, and bolts her self in her own room.)

Capt. G. (His arms full of portiere.) Oh! (Sitting down heavily in chair.) I'm
a brute, a pig--a bully, and a blackguard. My poor, poor little darling! "Made
to be amused only?"--

THE VALLEY OF THE SHADOW Knowing Good and Evil.

SCENE.The GADSBYS' bungalow in the Plains, in June. Punkah-coolies asleep in
veranda where Captain GADSBY is walking up and down. DOCTOR'S trap in porch.
JUNIOR CHAPLAIN drifting generally and uneasily through the house. Time, 3:4O
A. M. Heat 94 degrees in veranda.

DOCTOR. (Coming into veranda and touching G. on the shoulder.) You had better
go in and see her now.

Capt. G. (The color of good cigar-ash.) Eh, wha-at? Oh, yes, of course. What
did you say?

DOCTOR. (Syllable by syllable.) Go-in-to-the-room-and-see-her. She wants to
speak to you. (Aside, testily.) I shall have him on my hands next.

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (In half-lighted dining room.) Isn't there any?--

DOCTOR. (Savagely.) Hsb, you little fool!

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. Let me do my work. Gadsby, stop a minute--I (Edges after G.)

DOCTOR. Wait till she sends for you at least--at least. Man alive, he'll kill
you if you go in there! What are you bothering him for?

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (Coming into veranda.) I've given him a stiff brandy-peg. He
wants it. You've forgotten him for the last ten hours and--forgotten yourself
too.

G. enters bedroom, which is lit by one night-lamp. Ayah on the floor pretending
to be asleep.

VOICE. (From the bed.) All down the street--such bonfires! Ayah, go and put
them out! (Appealingly.) How can I sleep with an installation of the C.I.E. in
my room? No--not C.I.E. Something else. What was it?

Capt. G. (Trying to control his voice.) Minnie, I'm here. (Bending over bed.)
Don't you know me, Minnie? It's me--it's Phil--it's your husband.

VOICE. (Mechanically.) It's me--it's Phil--it's your husband.

Capt. G. She doesn't know me!--It's your own husband, darling.

VOICE. Your own husband, darling.

Ayah. (With an inspiration.) Memsahib understanding all I saying.

Capt. G. Make her understand me then--quick!

Ayah. (Hand on Mrs. G.'s fore-head.) Memsahib! Captain Sahib here.

VOICE. Salaem do. (Fretfully.) I know I'm not fit to be seen.

Ayah. (Aside to G.) Say "marneen" same as breakfash.

Capt. G. Good morning, little woman. How are we today?

VOICE. That's Phil. Poor old Phil. (Viciously.) Phil, you fool, I can't see
you. Come nearer.

Capt. G. Minnie! Minnie! It's me--you know me?

VOICE. (Mockingly.) Of course I do. Who does not know the man who was so cruel
to his wife--almost the only one he ever had?

Capt. G. Yes, dear. Yes--of course, of course. But won't you speak to him? He
wants to speak to you so much.

VOICE. They'd never let him in. The Doctor would give darwaza band even if he
were in the house. He'll never come. (Despairingly.) O Judas! Judas! Judas!

Capt. G. (Putting out his arms.) They have let him in, and he always was in the
house Oh, my love--don't you know me?

VOICE. (In a half chant.) "And it came to pass at the eleventh hour that this
poor soul repented." It knocked at the gates, but they were shut--tight as a
plaster--a great, burning plaster. They had pasted our marriage certificate all
across the door, and it was made of red-hot iron--people really ought to be
more careful, you know.

Capt. G. What am I to do? (Taking her in his arms.) Minnie! speak to me--to
Phil.

VOICE. What shall I say? Oh, tell me what to say before it's too late! They are
all going away and I can't say anything.

Capt. G. Say you know me! Only say you know me!

DOCTOR. (Who has entered quietly.) For pity's sake don't take it too much to
heart, Gadsby. It's this way sometimes. They won't recognize. They say all
sorts of queer things--don't you see?

Capt. G. All right! All right! Go away now; she'll recognize me; you're
bothering her. She must--mustn't she?

DOCTOR. She will before--Have I your leave to try?--

Capt. G. Anything you please, so long as she'll know me. It's only a question
of hours, isn't it?

DOCTOR. (Professionally.) While there's life there's hope y'know. But don't
build on it.

Capt. G. I don't. Pull her together if it's possible. (Aside.) What have I done
to deserve this?

DOCTOR. (Bending over bed.) Now, Mrs. Gadsby! We shall be all right tomorrow.
You must take it, or I sha'n't let Phil see you. It isn't nasty, is it?

Voice. Medicines! Always more medicines! Can't you leave me alone?

Capt. G. Oh, leave her in peace, Doc!

DOCTOR. (Stepping back,--aside.) May I be forgiven if I've done wrong. (Aloud.)
In a few minutes she ought to be sensible; but I daren't tell you to look for
anything. It's only--

Capt. G. What? Go on, man.

DOCTOR. (In a whisper.) Forcing the last rally.

Capt. G. Then leave us alone.

DOCTOR. Don't mind what she says at first, if you can. They--they--they turn
against those they love most sometimes in this.--It's hard, but--

Capt. G. Am I her husband or are you? Leave us alone for what time we have
together.

VOICE. (Confidentially.) And we were engaged quite suddenly, Emma. I assure you
that I never thought of it for a moment; but, oh, my little Me!--I don't know
what I should have done if he hadn't proposed.

Capt. G. She thinks of that Deercourt girl before she thinks of me. (Aloud.)
Minnie!

VOICE. Not from the shops, Mummy dear. You can get the real leaves from Kaintu,
and (laughing weakly) never mind about the blossoms--Dead white silk is only
fit for widows, and I won't wear it. It's as bad as a winding sheet. (A long
pause.)

Capt. G. I never asked a favor yet. If there is anybody to listen to me, let
her know me--even if I die too!

VOICE. (Very faintly.) Pip, Pip dear.

Capt. G. I'm here, darling.

VOICE. What has happened? They've been bothering me so with medicines and
things, and they wouldn't let you come and see me. I was never ill before. Am I
ill now?

Capt. G. You--you aren't quite well.

VOICE. How funny! Have I been ill long?

Capt. G. Some days; but you'll be all right in a little time.

VOICE. Do you think so, Pip? I don't feel well and--Oh! what have they done to
my hair?

Capt. G. I d-d-on't know.

VOICE. They've cut it off. What a shame!

Capt. G. It must have been to make your head cooler.

VOICE. Just like a boy's wig. Don't I look horrid?

Capt. G. Never looked prettier in your life, dear. (Aside.) How am I to ask her
to say goodbye?

VOICE. I don't feel pretty. I feel very ill. My heart won't work. It's nearly
dead inside me, and there's a funny feeling in my eyes. Everything seems the
same distance--you and the almirah and the table inside my eyes or miles away.
What does it mean, Pip?

Capt. G. You're a little feverish, Sweetheart--very feverish. (Breaking down.)
My love! my love! How can I let you go?

VOICE. I thought so. Why didn't you tell me that at first?

Capt. G. What?

VOICE. That I am going to--die.

Capt. G. But you aren't! You sha'n't.

Ayah to punkah-coolie. (Stepping into veranda after a glance at the bed. ).
Punkah chor do! (Stop pulling the punkah.)

VOICE. It's hard, Pip. So very, very hard after one year--just one year.
(Wailing.) And I'm only twenty. Most girls aren't even married at twenty. Can't
they do anything to help me? I don't want to die.

Capt. G. Hush, dear. You won't.

VOICE. What's the use of talking? Help me! You've never failed me yet. Oh,
Phil, help me to keep alive. (Feverishly.) I don't believe you wish me to live.
You weren't a bit sorry when that horrid Baby thing died. I wish I'd killed it!

Capt. G. (Drawing his hand across his forehead.) It's more than a man's meant
to bear--it's not right. (Aloud.) Minnie, love, I'd die for you if it would
help.

VOICE. No more death. There's enough already. Pip, don't you die too.

Capt. G. I wish I dared.

VOICE. It says: "Till Death do us part." Nothing after that--and so it would be
no use. It stops at the dying. Why does it stop there? Only such a very short
life, too. Pip, I'm sorry we married.

Capt. G. No! Anything but that, Min!

VOICE. Because you'll forget and I'll forget. Oh, Pip, don't forget! I always
loved you, though I was cross sometimes. If I ever did anything that you didn't
like, say you forgive me now.

Capt. G. You never did, darling. On my soul and honor you never did. I haven't
a thing to forgive you.

VOICE. I sulked for a whole week about those petunias. (With a laugh.) What a
little wretch I was, and how grieved you were! Forgive me that, Pp.

Capt. G. There's nothing to forgive. It was my fault. They were too near the
drive. For God's sake don't talk so, Minnie! There's such a lot to say and so
little time to say it in.

VOICE. Say that you'll always love me--until the end.

Capt. G. Until the end. (Carried away.) It's a lie. It must be, because we've
loved each other. This isn't the end.

VOICE. (Relapsing into semi-delirium.) My Church-service has an ivory cross on
the back, and it says so, so it must be true. "Till Death do us part."--but
that's a lie. (With a parody of G.'s manner.) A damned lie! (Recklessly.) Yes,
I can swear as well as a Trooper, Pip. I can't make my head think, though.
That's because they cut off my hair. How can one think with one's head all
fuzzy? (Pleadingly.) Hold me, Pip! Keep me with you always and always.
(Relapsing.) But if you marry the Thorniss girl when I'm dead, I'll come back
and howl under our bedroom window all night. Oh, bother! You'll think I'm a
jackal. Pip, what time is it?

Capt. G. A little before the dawn, dear.

VOICE. I wonder where I shall be this time tomorrow?

Capt. G. Would you like to see the Padre?

VOICE. Why should I? He'd tell me that I am going to heaven; and that wouldn't
be true, because you are here. Do you recollect when he upset the cream-ice all
over his trousers at the Gassers' tennis?

Capt. G. Yes, dear.

VOICE. I often wondered whether he got another pair of trousers; but then his
are so shiny all over that you really couldn't tell unless you were told. Let's
call him in and ask.

Capt. G. (Gravely.) No. I don't think he'd like that. Your head comfy,
Sweetheart?

VOICE. (Faintly with a sigh of contentment.) Yeth! Gracious, Pip, when did you
shave last? Your chin's worse than the barrel of a musical box.--No, don't lift
it up. I like it. (A pause.) You said you've never cried at all. You're crying
all over my cheek.

Capt. G. I-I-I can't help it, dear.

VOICE. How funny! I couldn't cry now to save my life. (G. shivers.) I want to
sing.

Capt. G. Won't it tire you? 'Better not, perhaps.

VOICE. Why? I won't be bothered about. (Begins in a hoarse quaver)

 "Minnie bakes oaten cake, Minnie brews ale,
 All because her Johnnie's coming home from the sea." (That's parade, Pip.)
 "And she grows red as a rose, who was so pale;
 And 'Are you sure the church-clock goes?' says she."

(Pettishly.) I knew I couldn't take the last note. How do the bass chords run?
(Puts out her hands and begins playing piano on the sheet.)

Capt. G. (Catching up hands.) Ahh! Don't do that, Pussy, if you love me.

VOICE. Love you? Of course I do. Who else should it be? (A pause.)

VOICE. (Very clearly.) Pip, I'm going now. Something's choking me cruelly.
(Indistinctly.) Into the dark--without you, my heart--But it's a lie, dear--we
mustn't believe it.--Forever and ever, living or dead. Don't let me go, my
husband--hold me tight.--They  can't--whatever happens. (A cough.) Pip--my Pip!
Not for always--and--so--soon! (Voice ceases.)

Pause of ten minutes. G. buries his face in the side of the bed while AYAH
bends over bed from opposite side and feels Mrs. G.'s breast and forehead.

Capt. G. (Rising.) Doctor Sahib ko salaam do.

Ayah. (Still by bedside, with a shriek.) Ail Ail Tuta-phuta! My Memsahib! Not
getting--not have got!--Pusseena agyal (The sweat has come.) (Fiercely to G.)
TUM jao Doctor Sahib ko jaldi! (You go to the doctor.) Oh, my Memsahib!

DOCTOR. (Entering hastily.) Come away, Gadsby. (Bends over bed.) Eh! The Dev--
What inspired you to stop the punkah? Get out, man--go away--wait outside! Go!
Here, Ayah! (Over his shoulder to G.) Mind I promise nothing.

The dawn breaks as G. stumbles into the garden.

Capt. M. (Rehung up at the gate on his way to parade and very soberly.) Old
man, how goes?

Capt. G. (Dazed.) I don't quite know. Stay a bit. Have a drink or something.
Don't run away. You're just getting amusing. Ha! ha!

Capt. M. (Aside.) What am I let in for? Gaddy has aged ten years in the night.

Capt. G. (Slowly, fingering charger's headstall.) Your curb's too loose.

Capt. M. So it is. Put it straight, will you? (Aside.) I shall be late for
parade. Poor Gaddy.

Capt. G. links and unlinks curb-chain aimlessly, and finally stands staring
toward the veranda. The day brightens.

DOCTOR. (Knocked out of professional gravity, tramping across flower-beds and
shaking G's hands.) It'-it's-it's !--Gadsby, there's a fair chance--a dashed
fair chance. The flicker, y'know. The sweat, y'know I saw how it would be. The
punkah, y'know. Deuced clever woman that Ayah of yours. Stopped the punkah just
at the right time. A dashed good chance! No--you don't go in. We'll pull her
through yet I promise on my reputation--under Providence. Send a man with this
note to Bingle. Two heads better than one. 'Specially the Ayah! We'll pull her
round. (Retreats hastily to house.)

Capt. G. (His head on neck of M.'s charger.) Jack! I bub-bu- believe, I'm going
to make a bu-bub-bloody exhibitiod of byself.

Capt. M. (Sniffing openly and feeling in his left cuff.) I b-b-believe, I'b
doing it already. Old bad, what cad I say? I'b as pleased as--Cod dab you,
Gaddy! You're one big idiot and I'b adother. (Pulling himself together.) Sit
tight! Here comes the Devil-dodger.

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (Who is not in the Doctor's confidence.) We--we are only men
in these things, Gadsby. I know that I can say nothing now to help

Capt. M. (jealously.) Then don't say it Leave him alone. It's not bad enough to
croak over. Here, Gaddy, take the chit to Bingle and ride hell-for-leather.
It'll do you good. I can't go.

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. Do him good! (Smiling.) Give me the chit and I'll drive. Let
him lie down. Your horse is blocking my cart--please!

Capt. M. (Slowly without reining back.) I beg your pardon--I'll apologize. On
paper if you like.

JUNIOR CHAPLAIN. (Flicking M.'s charger.) That'll do, thanks. Turn in, Gadsby,
and I'll bring Bingle back--ahem--"hell-for-leather."

Capt. M. (Solus.) It would have served me right if he'd cut me across the face.
He can drive too. I shouldn't care to go that pace in a bamboo cart. What a
faith he must have in his Maker--of harness! Come hup, you brute! (Gallops off
to parade, blowing his nose, as the sun rises.)

(INTERVAL OF FIVE WEEKS.)

Mrs. G. (Very white and pinched, in morning wrapper at breakfast table.) How
big and strange the room looks, and how glad I am to see it again! What dust,
though! I must talk to the servants. Sugar, Pip? I've almost forgotten.
(Seriously.) Wasn't I very ill?

Capt. G. Iller than I liked. (Tenderly.) Oh, you bad little Pussy, what a start
you gave me!

Mrs. G. I'll never do it again.

Capt. G. You'd better not. And now get those poor pale cheeks pink again, or I
shall be angry. Don't try to lift the urn. You'll upset it. Wait. (Comes round
to head of table and lifts urn.)

Mrs. G. (Quickly.) Khitmatgar, howarchikhana see kettly lao. Butler, get a
kettle from the cook-house. (Drawing down G.'s face to her own.) Pip dear, I
remember.

Capt. G. What?

Mrs. G. That last terrible night.

CAPT. G. Then just you forget all about it.

Mrs. G. (Softly, her eyes filling.) Never. It has brought us very close
together, my husband. There! (Interlude.) I'm going to give Junda a saree.

Capt. G. I gave her fifty dibs.

Mrs. G. So she told me. It was a 'normous reward. Was I worth it? (Several
interludes.) Don't! Here's the khitmatgar.--Two lumps or one Sir?

THE SWELLING OF JORDAN

If thou hast run with the footmen and they have wearied thee, then how canst
thou contend with horses? And if in the land of peace wherein thou trustedst
they wearied thee, then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan?

SCENE.The GADSBYS' bungalow in the Plains, on a January morning. Mrs. G.
arguing with bearer in back veranda.

Capt. M. rides up.

Capt. M. 'Mornin', Mrs. Gadsby. How's the Infant Phenomenon and the Proud
Proprietor?

Mrs. G. You'll find them in the front veranda; go through the house. I'm Martha
just now.

Capt. M, 'Cumbered about with cares of Khitmatgars? I fly.

Passes into front veranda, where GADSBV is watching GADSBY JUNIOR, aged ten
months, crawling about the matting.

Capt. M. What's the trouble, Gaddy-spoiling an honest man's Europe morning this
way? (Seeing G. JUNIOR.) By Jove, that yearling's comin' on amazingly! Any
amount of bone below the knee there.

Capt. G. Yes, he's a healthy little scoundrel. Don't you think his hair's
growing?

Capt. M. Let's have a look. Hi! Hst Come here, General Luck, and we'll report
on you.

Mrs. G. (Within.) What absurd name will you give him next? Why do you call him
that?

Capt. M. Isn't he our Inspector-General of Cavalry? Doesn't he come down in his
seventeen-two perambulator every morning the Pink Hussars parade? Don't
wriggle, Brigadier. Give us your private opinion on the way the third squadron
went past. 'Trifle ragged, weren't they?

Capt. G. A bigger set of tailors than the new draft I don't wish to see.
They've given me more than my fair share--knocking the squadron out of shape.
It's sickening!

Capt. M. When you're in command, you'll do better, young 'un. Can'tyou walk
yet? Grip my finger and try. (To G.) 'Twon't hurt his hocks, will it?

Capt. G. Oh, no. Don't let him flop, though, or he'll lick all the blacking off
your boots.

Mrs. G. (Within.) Who's destroy mg my son's character?

Capt. M. And my Godson's. I'm ashamed of you, Gaddy. Punch your father in the
eye, Jack! Don't you stand it! Hit him again I

Capt. G. (Sotto voce.) Put The Butcha down and come to the end of the veranda.
I'd rather the Wife didn't hear--just now.

Capt. M. You look awf'ly serious. Anything wrong?

Capt. G. 'Depends on your view entirely. I say, Jack, you won't think more
hardly of me than you can help, will you? Come further this way.--The fact of
the matter is, that I've made up my mind--at least I'm thinking seriously of--
cutting the Service.

Capt. M. Hwhatt?

Capt. G. Don't shout. I'm going to send in my papers.

Capt. M. You! Are you mad?

Capt. G. No--only married.

Capt. M. Look here! What's the meaning of it all? You never intend to leave us.
You can't. Isn't the best squadron of the best regiment of the best cavalry in
all the world good enough for you?

Capt. G. (Jerking his head over his shoulder.) She doesn't seem to thrive in
this God-forsaken country, and there's The Butcha to be considered and all
that, you know.

Capt. M. Does she say that she doesn't like India?

Capt. G. That's the worst of it. She won't for fear of leaving me.

Capt. M. What are the Hills made for?

Capt. G. Not for my wife, at any rate.

Capt. M. You know too much, Gaddy, and--I don't like you any the better for it!

Capt. G. Never mind that. She wants England, and The Butcha would be all the
better for it. I'm going to chuck. You don't understand.

Capt. M. (Hotly.) I understand this!--One hundred and thirty-seven new horse to
be licked into shape somehow before Luck comes round again; a hairy-heeled
draft who'll give more trouble than the horses; a camp next cold weather for a
certainty; ourselves the first on the roster; the Russian shindy ready to come
to a head at five minutes' notice, and you, the best of us all, backing out of
it all! Think a little, Gaddy. You won't do it.

Capt. G. Hang it, a man has some duties toward his family, I suppose.

Capt. M. I remember a man, though, who told me, the night after Amdheran, when
we were picketed under Jagai, and he'd left his sword--by the way, did you ever
pay Ranken for that sword?--in an Utmanzai's head--that man told me that he'd
stick by me and the Pinks as long as he lived. I don't blame him for not
sticking by me--I'm not much of a man--but I do blame him for not sticking by
the Pink Hussars.

Capt. G. (Uneasily.) We were little more than boys then. Can't you see, Jack,
how things stand? 'Tisn't as if we were serving for our bread. We've all of us,
more or less, got the filthy lucre. I'm luckier than some, perhaps. There's no
call for me to serve on.

Capt. M. None in the world for you or for us, except the Regimental. If you
don't choose to answer to that, of course--

Capt. G. Don't be too hard on a man. You know that a lot of us only take up the
thing for a few years and then go back to Town and catch on with the rest.

Capt. M. Not lots, and they aren't some of Us.

Capt. G. And then there are one's affairs at Home to be considered--my place
and the rents, and all that. I don't suppose my father can last much longer,
and that means the title, and so on.

Capt. M. 'Fraid you won't be entered in the Stud Book correctly unless you go
Home? Take six months, then, and come out in October. If I could slay off a
brother or two, I s'pose I should be a Marquis of sorts. Any fool can be that;
but it needs men, Gaddy--men like you--to lead flanking squadrons properly.
Don't you delude yourself into the belief that you're going Home to take your
place and prance about among pink-nosed Kabuli dowagers. You aren't built that
way. I know better.

Capt. G. A man has a right to live his life as happily as he can. You aren't
married.

Capt. M. No--praise be to Providence and the one or two women who have had the
good sense to jawab me.

Capt. G. Then you don't know what it is to go into your own room and see your
wife's head on the pillow, and when everything else is safe and the house shut
up for the night, to wonder whether the roof-beams won't give and kill her.

Capt. M. (Aside.) Revelations first and second! (Aloud.) So-o! I knew a man who
got squiffy at our Mess once and confided to me that he never helped his wife
on to her horse without praying that she'd break her neck before she came back.
All husbands aren't alike, you see.

Capt. G. What on earth has that to do with my case? The man must ha' been mad,
or his wife as bad as they make 'em.

Capt. M. (Aside.) 'No fault of yours if either weren't all you say. You've
forgotten the time when you were insane about the Herriott woman. You always
were a good hand at forgetting. (Aloud.) Not more mad than men who go to the
other extreme. Be reasonable, Gaddy. Your roof-beams are sound enough.

Capt. G. That was only a way of speaking. I've been uneasy and worried about
the Wife ever since that awful business three years ago--when--I nearly lost
her. Can you wonder?

Capt. M. Oh, a shell never falls twice in the same place. You've paid your toll
to misfortune--why should your Wife be picked out more than anybody else's?

Capt. G. I can talk just as reasonably as you can, but you don't understand--
you don't understand. And then there's The Butcha. Deuce knows where the Ayah
takes him to sit in the evening! He has a bit of a cough. Haven't you noticed
it?

Capt. M. Bosh! The Brigadier's jumping out of his skin with pure condition.
He's got a muzzle like a rose-leaf and the chest of a two-year-old. What's
demoralized you?

Capt. G. Funk. That's the long and the short of it. Funk!

Capt. M. But what is there to funk?

Capt. G. Everything. It's ghastly.

Capt. M. Ah! I see.
 You don't want to fight,
 And by Jingo when we do,
 You've got the kid, you've got the Wife,
 You've got the money, too.
That's about the case, eh?

Capt. G. I suppose that's it. But it's not for myself. It's because of them. At
least I think it is.

Capt. M. Are you sure? Looking at the matter in a cold-blooded light, the Wife
is provided for even if you were wiped out tonight. She has an ancestral home
to go to, money and the Brigadier to carry on the illustrious name.

Capt. G. Then it is for myself or because they are part of me. You don't see
it. My life's so good, so pleasant, as it is, that I want to make it quite
safe. Can't you understand?

Capt. M. Perfectly. "Shelter-pit for the Off'cer's charger," as they say in the
Line.

Capt. G. And I have everything to my hand to make it so. I'm sick of the strain
and the worry for their sakes out here; and there isn't a single real
difficulty to prevent my dropping it altogether. It'll only cost me--Jack, I
hope you'll never know the shame that I've been going through for the past six
months.

Capt. M. Hold on there! I don't wish to he told. Every man has his moods and
tenses sometimes.

Capt. G. (Laughing bitterly.) Has he? What do you call craning over to see
where your near-fore lands?

Capt. M. In my case it means that I have been on the Considerable Bend, and
have come to parade with a Head and a Hand. It passes in three strides.

Capt. G. (Lowering voice.) It never passes with me, Jack. I'm always thinking
about it. Phil Gadsby funking a fall on parade! Sweet picture, isn't it! Draw
it for me.

Capt. M. (Gravely.) Heaven forbid! A man like you can't be as bad as that. A
fall is no nice thing, but one never gives it a thought.

Capt. G. Doesn't one? Wait till you've got a wife and a youngster of your own,
and then you'll know how the roar of the squadron behind you turns you cold all
up the back.

Capt. M. (Aside.) And this man led at Amdheran after Bagal Deasin went under,
and we were all mixed up together, and he came out of the snow dripping like a
butcher. (Aloud.) Skittles! The men can always open out, and you can always
pick your way more or less. We haven't the dust to bother us, as the men have,
and whoever heard of a horse stepping on a man?

Capt. G. Never--as long as he can see. But did they open out for poor
Errington?

Capt. M. Oh, this is childish!

Capt. G. I know it is, worse than that. I don't care. You've ridden Van Loo. Is
he the sort of brute to pick his way--'specially when we're coming up in column
of troop with any pace on?

Capt. M. Once in a Blue Moon do we gallop in column of troop, and then only to
save time. Aren't three lengths enough for you?

Capt. G. Yes--quite enough. They just allow for the full development of the
smash. I'm talking like a cur, I know: but I tell you that, for the past three
months, I've felt every hoof of the squadron in the small of my back every time
that I've led.

Capt. M. But, Gaddy, this is awful!

Capt. G. Isn't it lovely? Isn't it royal? A Captain of the Pink Hussars
watering up his charger before parade like the blasted boozing Colonel of a
Black Regiment!

Capt. M. You never did!

Capt. G. Once only. He squelched like a mussuck, and the Troop-Sergeant-Major
cocked his eye at me. You know old Haffy's eye. I was afraid to do it again.

Capt. M. I should think so. That was the best way to rupture old Van Loo's
tummy, and make him crumple you up. You knew that.

Capt. G. I didn't care. It took the edge off him.

Capt. M. "Took the edge off him"? Gaddy, you--you--you mustn't, you know! Think
of the men.

Capt. G. That's another thing I am afraid of. D'you s'pose they know?

Capt. M. Let's hope not; but they're deadly quick to spot skirm--little things
of that kind. See here, old man, send the Wife Home for the hot weather and
come to Kashmir with me. We'll start a boat on the Dal or cross the Rhotang--
shoot ibex or loaf--which you please. Only come! You're a bit off your oats and
you're talking nonsense. Look at the Colonel--swag-bellied rascal that he is.
He has a wife and no end of a bow-window of his own. Can any one of us ride
round him--chalkstones and all? I  can't, and I think I can shove a crock along
a bit.

Capt. G. Some men are different. I haven't any nerve. Lord help me, I haven't
the nerve! I've taken up a hole and a half to get my knees well under the
wallets. I can't help it. I'm so afraid of anything happening to me. On my
soul, I ought to be broke in front of the squadron, for cowardice.

Capt. M. Ugly word, that. I should never have the courage to own up.

Capt. G. I meant to lie about my reasons when I began, but--I've got out of the
habit of lying to you, old man. Jack, you won't?--But I know you won't.

Capt. M. Of course not. (Half aloud.) The Pinks are paying dearly for their
Pride.

Capt. G. Eh! Wha-at?

Capt. M. Don't you know? The men have called Mrs. Gadsby the Pride of the Pink
Hussars ever since she came to us.

Capt. G. 'Tisn't her fault. Don't think that. It's all mine.

Capt. M. What does she say?

Capt. G. I haven't exactly put it before her. She's the best little woman in
the world, Jack, and all that--but she wouldn't counsel a man to stick to his
calling if it came between him and her. At least, I think--

Capt. M. Never mind. Don't tell her what you told me. Go on the Peerage and
Landed-Gentry tack.

Capt. G. She'd see through it. She's five times cleverer than I am.

Capt. M. (Aside.) Then she'll accept the sacrifice and think a little bit worse
of him for the rest of her days.

Capt. G. (Absently.) I say, do you despise me?

Capt. M. 'Queer way of putting it. Have you ever been asked that question?
Think a minute. What answer used you to give?

Capt. G. So bad as that? I'm not entitled to expect anything more, but it's a
bit hard when one's best friend turns round and--

Capt. M. So I have found. But you will have consolations--Bailiffs and Drains
and Liquid Manure and the Primrose League, and, perhaps, if you're lucky, the
Colonelcy of a Yeomanry Cav-al-ry Regiment--all uniform and no riding, I
believe. How old are you?

Capt. G. Thirty-three. I know it's--

Capt. M. At forty you'll be a fool of a J. P. landlord. At fifty you'll own a
bath-chair, and The Brigadier, if he takes after you, will be fluttering the
dovecotes of--what's the particular dunghill you're going to? Also, Mrs. Gadsby
will be fat.

Capt. G. (Limply.) This is rather more than a joke.

Capt. M. D'you think so? Isn't cutting the Service a joke? It generally takes a
man fifty years to arrive at it. You're quite right, though. It is more than a
joke. You've managed it in thirty-three.

Capt. G. Don't make me feel worse than I do. Will it satisfy you if I own that
I am a shirker, a skrim-shanker, and a coward?

Capt. M. It will not, because I'm the only man in the world who can talk to you
like this without being knocked down. You mustn't take all that I've said to
heart in this way. I only spoke--a lot of it at least--out of pure selfishness,
because, because--Oh, damn it all, old man,--I don't know what I shall do
without you. Of course, you've got the money and the place and all that--and
there are two very good reasons why you should take care of yourself.

Capt. G. 'Doesn't make it any sweeter. I'm backing out--I know I am. I always
had a soft drop in me somewhere--and I daren't risk any danger to them.

Capt. M. Why in the world should you? You're bound to think of your family--
bound to think. Er--hmm. If I wasn't a younger son I'd go too--be shot if I
wouldn't!

Capt. G. Thank you, Jack. It's a kind lie, but it's the blackest you've told
for some time. I know what I'm doing, and I'm going into it with my eyes open.
Old man, I can't help it. What would you do if you were in my place?

Capt. M. (Aside.) 'Couldn't conceive any woman getting permanently between me
and the Regiment. (Aloud.) 'Can't say. 'Very likely I should do no better. I'm
sorry for you--awf'ly sorry--but "if them's your sentiments," I believe, I
really do, that you are acting wisely.

Capt. G. Do you? I hope you do. (In a whisper.) Jack, be very sure of yourself
before you marry. I'm an ungrateful ruffian to say this, but marriage--even as
good a marriage as mine has been--hampers a man's work, it cripples his sword-
arm, and oh, it plays Hell with his notions of duty. Sometimes--good and sweet
as she is--sometimes I could wish that I had kept my freedom--No, I don't mean
that exactly.

Mrs. G. (Coming down veranda.) What are you wagging your head over, Pip?

Capt. M. (Turning quickly.) Me, as usual. The old sermon. Your husband is
recommending me to get married. 'Never saw such a one-ideaed man.

Mrs. G. Well, why don't you? I dare say you would make some woman very happy.

Capt. G. There's the Law and the Prophets, Jack. Never mind the Regiment. Make
a woman happy. (Aside.) O Lord!

Capt. M. We'll see. I must be off to make a Troop Cook desperately unhappy. I
won't have the wily Hussar fed on Government Bullock Train shinbones--
(Hastily.) Surely black ants can't be good for The Brigadier. He's picking em
off the matting and eating 'em. Here, Senor Comandante Don Grubbynose, come and
talk to me. (Lifts G. JUNIOR in his arms.) 'Want my watch? You won't be able to
put it into your mouth, but you can try. (G. JUNIOR drops watch, breaking dial
and hands.)

Mrs. G. Oh, Captain Mafflin, I am so sorry! Jack, you bad, bad little villain.
Ahhh!

Capt. M. It's not the least consequence, I assure you. He'd treat the world in
the same way if he could get it into his hands. Everything's made to be played,
with and broken, isn't it, young 'un?
* * * * * *

Mrs. G. Mafflin didn't at all like his watch being broken, though he was too
polite to say so. It was entirely his fault for giving it to the child. Dem
little puds are werry, werry feeble, aren't dey, by Jack-in-de-box? (To G.)
What did he want to see you for?

Capt. G. Regimental shop as usual.

Mrs. G. The Regiment! Always the Regiment. On my word, I sometimes feel jealous
of Mafflin.

Capt. G. (Wearily.) Poor old Jack? I don't think you need. Isn't it time for
The Butcha to have his nap? Bring a chair out here, dear. I've got some thing
to talk over with you.

THIS IS THE END OF THE STORY OF THE GADSBYS



VOLUME VIII from MINE OWN PEOPLE

Bimi
Namgay Doola
The Recrudescence Of Imray
Moti Guj--Mutineer

BIMI

THE orangoutang in the big iron cage lashed to the sheep-pen began the
discussion. The night was stiflingly hot, and as Hans Breitmann and I passed
him, dragging our bedding to the fore-peak of the steamer, he roused himself
and chattered obscenely. He had been caught somewhere in the Malayan
Archipelago, and was going to England to be exhibited at a shilling a head. For
four days he had struggled, yelled, and wrenched at the heavy iron bars of his
prison without ceasing, and had nearly slain a Lascar incautious enough to come
within reach of the great hairy paw.

"It would he well for you, mine friend, if you was a liddle seasick," said Hans
Breitmann, pausing by the cage. "You haf too much Ego in your Cosmos."

The orangoutang's arm slid out negligently from between the bars. No one would
have believed that it would make a sudden snake-like rush at the German's
breast. The thin silk of the sleeping-suit tore out: Hans stepped back
unconcernedly, to pluck a banana from a bunch hanging close to one of the
boats.

"Too much Ego," said he, peeling the fruit and offering it to the caged devil,
who was rending the silk to tatters.

Then we laid out our bedding in the bows, among the sleeping Lascars, to catch
any breeze that the pace of the ship might give us. The sea was like smoky oil,
except where it turned to fire under our forefoot and whirled back into the
dark in smears of dull flame. There was a thunderstorm some miles away: we
could see the glimmer of the lightning. The ship's cow, distressed by the heat
and the smell of the ape-beast in the cage, lowed unhappily from time to time
in exactly the same key as the lookout man at the bows answered the hourly call
from the bridge. The trampling tune of the engines was very distinct, and the
jarring of the ash-lift, as it was tipped into the sea, hurt the procession of
hushed noise. Hans lay down by my side and lighted a good-night cigar. This was
naturally the beginning of conversation. He owned a voice as soothing as the
wash of the sea, and stores of experiences as vast as the sea itself; for his
business in life was to wander up and down the world, collecting orchids and
wild beasts and ethnological specimens for German and American dealers. I
watched the glowing end of his cigar wax and wane in the gloom, as the
sentences rose and fell, till I was nearly asleep. The orangoutang, troubled by
some dream of the forests of his freedom, began to yell like a soul in
purgatory, and to wrench madly at the bars of the cage.

"If he was out now dere would not be much of us left hereabouts," said Hans,
lazily. "He screams good. See, now, how I shall tame him when he stops
himself."

There was a pause in the outcry, and from Hans' mouth came an imitation of a
snake's hiss, so perfect that I almost sprung to my feet. The sustained
murderous sound ran along the deck, and the wrenching at the bars ceased. The
orangoutang was quaking in an ecstasy of pure terror.

"Dot stop him," said Hans. "I learned dot trick in Mogoung Tanjong when I was
collecting liddle monkeys for some peoples in Berlin. Efery one in der world is
afraid of der monkeys except der snake. So I blay snake against monkey, and he
keep quite still. Dere was too much Ego in his Cosmos. Dot is der soul-custom
of monkeys. Are you asleep, or will you listen, and I will tell a dale dot you
shall not pelief?"

"There's no tale in the wide world that I can't believe," I said.

"If you have learned pelief you haf learned somedings. Now I shall try your
pelief. Good! When I was collecting dose liddle monkeys--it was in '79 or '80,
und I was in der islands of der Archipelago--over dere in der dark"--he pointed
southward to New Guinea generally--"Mein Gott! I would sooner collect life red
devils than liddle monkeys. When dey do not bite off your thumbs dey are always
dying from nostalgia--homesick--for dey haf der imperfect soul, which is midway
arrested in defelopment--und too much Ego. I was dere for nearly a year, und
dere I found a man dot was called Bertran. He was a Frenchman, und he was a
goot man--naturalist to the bone. Dey said he was an escaped convict, but he
was a naturalist, und dot was enough for me. He would call all her life beasts
from der forests, und dey would come. I said he was St. Francis of Assisi in a
new dransmigration produced, und he laughed und said he had never preach to der
fishes. He sold dem for trepang--beche-de-mer.

"Und dot man, who was king of beasts-tamer men, he had in der house shush such
anoder as dot devil-animal in der cage--a great orangoutang dot thought he was
a man. He haf found him when he was a child--der orangoutang--und he was child
and brother and opera comique all round to Bertran. He had his room in dot
house--not a cage, but a room--mit a bed and sheets, and he would go to bed and
get up in der morning and smoke his cigar und eat his dinner mit Bertran, und
walk mit him hand-in-hand, which was most horrible. Herr Gott! I haf seen dot
beast throw himself back in his chair and laugh when Bertran haf made fun of
me. He was not a beast; he was a man, and he talked to Bertran, und Bertran
comprehended, for I bave seen dem. Und he was always politeful to me except
when I talk too long to Bertran und say nodings at all to him. Den he would
pull me away--dis great, dark devil, mit his enormous paws shush as if I was a
child. He was not a beast, he was a man. Dis I saw pefore I know him three
months, und Bertran he haf saw the same; and Bimi, der orangoutang, haf
understood us both, mit his cigar between his big-dog teeth und der blue gum.

"I was dere a year, dere und at dere oder islands--somedimes for monkeys and
somedimes for butterflies und orchits. One time Bertran says to me dot he will
be married, because he hass found a girl dot was goot, and he inquire if this
marrying idea was right. I would not say, pecause it was not me dot was going
to be married. Den he go off courting der girl--she was a half-caste French
girl--very pretty. Haf you got a new light for my cigar? Oof! Very pretty. Only
I say 'Haf you thought of Bimi? If he pulls me away when I talk to you, what
will he do to your wife? He will pull her in pieces. If I was you, Bertran, I
would gif my wife for wedding present der stuff figure of Bimi.' By dot time I
bad learned somedings about der monkey peoples. 'Shoot him?' says Bertran. 'He
is your beast,' I said; "if he was mine he would be shot now.'

"Den I felt at der back of my neck der fingers of Bimi. Mein Gott! I tell you
dot he talked through dose fingers. It was der deaf-and-dumb alphabet all
gomplete. He slide his hairy arm round my neck, and he tilt up my chin and look
into my face, shust to see if I understood his talk so well as he understood
mine.
               
"'See now dere!' says Bertran, 'und you would shoot him while he is cuddling
you? Dot is der Teuton ingrate!'

"But I knew dot I had made Bimi a life's enemy, pecause his fingers haf talk
murder through the back of my neck. Next dime I see Bimi dere was a pistol in
my belt, und he touch it once, and I open de breech to show him it was loaded.
He haf seen der liddle monkeys killed in der woods, and he understood.

"So Bertran he was married, and he forgot clean about Bimi dot was skippin'
alone on the beach mit der haf of a human soul in his belly. I was see him
skip, und he took a big bough und thrash der sand till he haf made a great hole
like a grave. So I says to Bertran 'For any sakes, kill Bimi. He is mad mit der
jealousy.'

"Bertran haf said: 'He is not mad at all. He haf obey and love my wife, und if
she speaks he will get her slippers,' und he looked at his wife across der
room. She was a very pretty girl.

"Den I said to him: 'Dost thou pretend to know monkeys und dis beast dot is
lashing himself mad upon der sands, pecause you do not talk to him? Shoot him
when he comes to der house, for he haf der light in his eyes dot means killing-
-und killing.' Bimi come to der house, but dere was no light in his eyes. It
was all put away, cunning--so cunning--und he fetch der girl her slippers, and
Bertran turn to me und say: 'Dost thou know him in nine months more dan I haf
known him n twelve years? Shall a child stab his fader? I have fed him, und he
was my child. Do not speak this nonsense to my wife or to me any more.'

"Dot next day Bertran came to my house to help me make some wood cases for der
specimens, und he tell me dot he haf left his wife a liddle while mit Bimi in
der garden. Den I finish my cases quick, und I say: 'Let us go to your house
und get a trink.' He laugh und say: 'Come along, dry mans.'

"His wife was not in der garden, und Bimi did not come when Bertran called. Und
his wife did not come when he called, und he knocked at her bedroom door und
dot was shut tight-locked. Den he looked at me, und his face was white. I broke
down der door mit my shoulder, und der thatch of der roof was torn into a great
hole, und der sun came in upon der floor. Haf you ever seen paper in der waste-
basket, or cards at whist on der table scattered? Dere was no wife dot could be
seen. I tell you dere was noddings in dot room dot might be a woman. Dere was
stuff on der floor, und dot was all. I looked at dese things und I was very
sick; but Bertran looked a little longer at what was upon the floor und der
walls, und der hole in der thatch. Den he pegan to laugh, soft and low, und I
know und thank God dot he was mad. He nefer cried, he nefer prayed. He stood
still in der doorway und laugh to himself. Den he said: 'She haf locked herself
in dis room, and he haf torn up der thatch. Fi donc. Dot is so. We will mend
der thatch und wait for Bimi. He will surely come.'

"I tell you we waited ten days in dot house, after der room was made into a
room again, and once or twice we saw Bimi comin' a liddle way from der woods.
He was afraid pecause he haf done wrong. Bertran called him when he was come to
look on the tenth day, und Bimi come skipping along der beach und making
noises, mit a long piece of Nack hair in his hands. Den Bertran laugh and say,
'Fi donc' shust as if it was a glass broken upon der table; und Bimi come
nearer, und Bertran was honey-sweet in his voice and laughed to himself. For
three days he made love to Bimi, pecause Bimi would not let himself be touched
Den Bimi come to dinner at der same table mit us, und der hair on his hands was
all black und thick mit--mit what had dried on his hands. Bertran gave him
sangaree till Bimi was drunk and stupid, und den--"

Hans paused to puff at his cigar.

"And then?" said I.

"Und den Bertran kill him with his hands, und I go for a walk upon der heach.
It was Bertran's own piziness. When I come back der ape he was dead, und
Bertran he was dying abofe him; but still he laughed a liddle und low, and he
was quite content. Now you know der formula uf der strength of der orangoutang-
-it is more as seven to one in relation to man. But Bertran, he haf killed Bimi
mit sooch dings as Gott gif him. Dot was der mericle."

The infernal clamor in the cage recommenced. "Aha! Dot friend of ours haf still
too much Ego in his Cosmos, Be quiet, thou!"

Hans hissed long and venomously. We could hear the great beast quaking in his
cage.

"But why in the world didn't you help Bertran instead of letting him be
killed?" I asked.

"My friend," said Hans, composedly stretching himself to slumber, "it was not
nice even to mineself dot I should lif after I had seen dot room wit der hole
in der thatch. Und Bertran, he was her husband. Good-night, und sleep well."



NAMGAY DOOLA

ONCE upon a time there was a king who lived on the road to Thibet, very many
miles in the Himalaya Mountains. His kingdom was 11,000 feet above the sea, and
exactly four miles square, but most of the miles stood on end, owing to the
nature of the country. His revenues were rather less than 400 pounds yearly,
and they were expended on the maintenance of one elephant and a standing army
of five men. He was tributary to the Indian government, who allowed him certain
sums for keeping a section of the Himalaya-Thibet road in repair. He further
increased his revenues by selling timber to the railway companies, for he would
cut the great deodar trees in his own forest and they fell thundering into the
Sutlej River and were swept down to the Plains, 300 miles away, and became
railway ties. Now and again this king, whose name does not matter, would mount
a ring-streaked horse and ride scores of miles to Simlatown to confer with the
lieutenant-governor on matters of state, or assure the viceroy that his sword
was at the service of the queen-empress. Then the viceroy would cause a ruffle
of drums to be sounded and the ring-streaked horse and the cavalry of the
state--two men in tatters--and the herald who bore the Silver Stick before the
king would trot back to their own place, which was between the tail of a
heaven-climbing glacier and a dark birch forest.

Now, from such a king, always remembering that he possessed one veritable
elephant and could count his descent for 1,200 years, I expected, when it was
my fate to wander through his dominions, no more than mere license to live.

The night had closed in rain, and rolling clouds blotted out the lights of the
villages in the valley. Forty miles away, untouched by cloud or storm, the
white shoulder of Dongo Pa--the Mountain of the Council of the Gods--upheld the
evening star. The monkeys sung sorrowfully to each other as they hunted for dry
roots in the fern-draped trees, and the last puff of the day-wind brought from
the unseen villages the scent of damp wood smoke, hot cakes, dripping
undergrowth, and rotting pine-cones. That smell is the true smell of the
Himalayas, and if it once gets into the blood of a man he will, at the last,
forgetting everything else, return to the Hills to die. The clouds closed and
the smell went away, and there remained nothing in all the world except
chilling white mists and the boom of the Sutlej River.

A fat-tailed sheep, who did not want to die, bleated lamentably at my tent-
door. He was scuffling with the prime minister and the director-general of
public education, and he was a royal gift to me and my camp servants. I
expressed my thanks suitably and inquired if I might have audience of the king.
The prime minister readjusted his turban--it had fallen off in the struggle--
and assured me that the king would be very pleased to see me. Therefore I
dispatched two bottles as a foretaste, and when the sheep had entered upon
another incarnation, climbed up to the king's palace through the wet. He had
sent his army to escort me, but it stayed to talk with my cook. Soldiers are
very much alike all the world over.

The palace was a four-roomed, white-washed mud-and-timber house, the finest in
all the Hills for a day's journey. The king was dressed in a purple velvet
jacket, white muslin trousers, and a saffron-yellow turban of price. He gave me
audience in a little carpeted room opening off the palace courtyard, which was
occupied by the elephant of state. The great beast was sheeted and anchored
from trunk to tail, and the curve of his back stood out against the sky line.

The prime minister and the director-general of public instruction were present
to introduce me; but all the court had been dismissed lest the two bottles
aforesaid should corrupt their morals. The king cast a wreath of heavy, scented
flowers round my neck as I bowed, and inquired how my honored presence had the
felicity to be. I said that through seeing his auspicious countenance the mists
of the night had turned into sunshine, and that by reason of his beneficent
sheep his good deeds would be remembered by the gods. He said that since I had
set my magnificent foot in his kingdom the crops would probably yield seventy
per cent more than the average. I said that the fame of the king had reached to
the four corners of the earth, and that the nations gnashed their teeth when
they heard daily of the glory of his realm and the wisdom of his moon-like
prime minister and lotus-eyed director-general of public education.

Then we sat down on clean white cushions, and I was at the king's right hand.
Three minutes later he was telling me that the condition of the maize crop was
something disgraceful, and that the railway companies would not pay him enough
for his timber. The talk shifted to and fro with the bottles. We discussed very
many quaint things, and the king became confidential on the subject of
government generally. Most of all he dwelt on the shortcomings of one of his
subjects, who, from what I could gather, had been paralyzing the executive.

"In the old days," said the king, "I could have ordered the elephant yonder to
trample him to death. Now I must e'en send him seventy miles across the hills
to be tried, and his keep for that time would be upon the state. And the
elephant eats everything."

"What be the man's crimes, Rajah Sahib?" said I.

"Firstly, he is an 'outlander,' and no man of mine own people. Secondly, since
of my favor I gave him land upon his coming, he refuses to pay revenue. Am I
not the lord of the earth, above and below--entitled by right and custom to
one-eighth of the crop? Yet this devil, establishing himself, refuses to pay a
single tax . . . and he brings a poisonous spawn of babes."

"Cast him into jail," I said.

"Sahib," the king answered, shifting a little on the cushions, "once and only
once in these forty years sickness came upon me so that I was not able to go
abroad. In that hour I made a vow to my God that I would never again cut man or
woman from the light of the sun and the air of God, for I perceived the nature
of the punishment. How can I break my vow? Were it only the lopping off of a
hand or a foot, I should not delay. But even that is impossible now that the
English have rule. One or another of my people"--he looked obliquely at the
director-general of public education--"would at once write a letter to the
viceroy, and perhaps I should be deprived of that ruffle of drums."

He unscrewed the mouthpiece of his silver water-pipe, fitted a plain amber one,
and passed the pipe to me. "Not content with refusing revenue," he continued,
"this outlander refuses also to beegar" (this is the corvee or forced labor on
the roads), "and stirs my people up to the like treason. Yet he is, if so he
wills, an expert log-snatcher. There is none better or bolder among my people
to clear a block of the river when the logs stick fast."

"But he worships strange gods," said the prime minister, deferentially.

"For that I have no concern," said the king, who was as tolerant as Akbar in
matters of belief. "To each man his own god, and the fire or Mother Earth for
us all at the last. It is the rebellion that offends me."

"The king has an army," I suggested. "Has not the king burned the man's house,
and left him naked to the night dews?"

"Nay. A hut is a hut, and it holds the life of a man. But once I sent my army
against him when his excuses became wearisome. Of their heads he brake three
across the top with a stick. The other two men ran away. Also the guns would
not shoot."

I had seen the equipment of the infantry. One-third of it was an old muzzle-
loading fowling-piece with ragged rust holes where the nipples should have
been; one-third a wirebound matchlock with a worm-eaten stock, and one-third a
four-bore flint duck-gun, without a flint.

"But it is to be remembered," said the king, reaching out for the bottle, "that
he is a very expert log-snatcher and a man of a merry face. What shall I do to
him, sahib?"

This was interesting. The timid hill-folk would as soon have refused taxes to
their king as offerings to their gods. The rebel must be a man of character.

"If it be the king's permission," I said, "I will not strike my tents till the
third day, and I will see this man. The mercy of the king is godlike, and
rebellion is like unto the sin of witchcraft. Moreover, both the bottles, and
another, be empty."

"You have my leave to go," said the king.

Next morning the crier went through the stare proclaiming that there was a log-
jam on the river and that it behooved all loyal subjects to clear it. The
people poured down from their villages to the moist, warm valley of poppy
fields, and the king and I went with them.

Hundreds of dressed deodar logs had caught on a snag of rock, and the river was
bringing down more logs every minute to complete the blockade. The water
snarled and wrenched and worried at the timber, while the population of the
state prodded at the nearest logs with poles, in the hope of easing the
pressure. Then there went up a shout of "Namgay Doola! Namgay Doola!" and a
large, red-haired villager hurried up, stripping off his clothes as he ran.

"That he is. That is the rebel!" said the king. "Now will the dam be cleared."

"But why has he red hair?" I asked, since red hair among hill-folk is as
uncommon as blue or green.

"He is an outlander," said the king. "Well done! Oh, well done!"

Namgay Doola had scrambled on the jam and was clawing out the butt of a log
with a rude sort of a boat-hook. It slid forward slowly, as an alligator moves,
and three or four others followed it. The green water spouted through the gaps.
Then the villagers howled and shouted and leaped among the logs, pulling and
pushing the obstinate timber, and the red head of Namgay Doola was chief among
them all. The logs swayed and chafed and groaned as fresh consignments from up-
stream battered the now weakening dam. It gave way at last in a smother of
foam, racing butts, bobbing black heads, and a confusion indescribable, as the
river tossed everything before it. I saw the red head go down with the last
remnants of the jam and disappear between the great grinding tree trunks. It
rose close to the hank, and blowing like a grampus, Namgay Doola wiped the
water out of his eyes and made obeisance to the king.

I had time to observe the man closely. The virulent redness of his shock head
and beard was most startling, and in the thicket of hair twinkled above high
cheek-bones two very merry blue eyes. He was indeed an outlander, but yet a
Thibetan in language, habit and attire. He spoke the Lepcha dialect with an
indescribable softening of the gutturals. It was not so much a lisp as an
accent.

"Whence comest thou?" I asked, wondering.

"From Thibet." He pointed across the hills and grinned. That grin went straight
to my heart. Mechanically I held out my hand and Namgay Doola took it. No pure
Thibetan would have understood the meaning of the gesture. He went away to look
for his clothes, and as he climbed back to his village, I heard a joyous yell
that seemed unaccountably familiar. It was the whooping of Namgay Doola.

"You see now," said the king, "why I would not kill him. He is a bold man among
my logs, but," and he shook his head like a schoolmaster, "I know that before
long there will be complaints of him in the court. Let us return to the palace
and do justice."

It was that king's custom to judge his subjects every day between eleven and
three o'clock. I heard him do justice equitably on weighty matters of trespass,
slander, and a little wife-stealing. Then his brow clouded and he summoned me.

"Again it is Namgay Doola," he said, despairingly. "Not content with refusing
revenue on his own part, he has bound half his village by an oath to the like
treason. Never before has such a thing befallen me! Nor are my taxes heavy."

A rabbit-faced villager, with a blush-rose stuck behind his ear, advanced
trembling. He had been in Namgay Doola's conspiracy, but had told everything
and hoped for the king's favor.

"Oh, king!" said I, "if it be the king's will, let this matter stand over till
the morning. Only the gods can do right in a hurry, and it may be that yonder
villager has lied."

"Nay, for I know the nature of Namgay Doola; but since a guest asks, let the
matter remain. Wilt thou, for my sake, speak harshly to this red-headed
outlander? He may listen to thee."

I made an attempt that very evening, but for the life of me I could not keep my
countenance. Namgay Doola grinned so persuasively and began to tell me about a
big brown bear in a poppy field by the river. Would I care to shoot that bear?
I spoke austerely on the sin of detected conspiracy and the certainty of
punishment. Namgay Doola's face clouded for a moment. Shortly afterward he
withdrew from my tent, and I heard him singing softly among the pines. The
words were unintelligible to me, but the tune, like his liquid, insinuating
speech, seemed the ghost of something strangely familiar.

"Dir hane mard-i-yemen dir To weeree ala gee,"

crooned Namgay Doola again and again, and I racked my brain for that lost tune.
It was not till after dinner that I discovered some one had cut a square foot
of velvet from the centre of my best camera-cloth. This made me so angry that I
wandered down the valley in the hope of meeting the big brown bear. I could
hear him grunting like a discontented pig in the poppy field as I waited
shoulder deep in the dew-dripping Indian corn to catch him after his meal. The
moon was at full and drew out the scent of the tasseled crop. Then I heard the
anguished bellow of a Himalayan cow--one of the little black crummies no bigger
than Newfoundland dogs. Two shadows that looked like a bear and her cub hurried
past me. I was in the act of firing when I saw that each bore a brilliant red
head. The lesser animal was trailing something rope-like that left a dark track
on the path. They were within six feet of me, and the shadow of the moonlight
lay velvet-black on their faces. Velvet-black was exactly the word, for by all
the powers of moonlight they were masked in the velvet of my camera-cloth. I
marveled, and went to bed.

Next morning the kingdom was in an uproar. Namgay Doola, men said, had gone
forth in the night and with a sharp knife had cut off the tail of a cow
belonging to the rabbit-faced villager who had betrayed him. It was sacrilege
unspeakable against the holy cow. The state desired his blood, but he had
retreated into his hut, barricaded the doors and windows with big stones, and
defied the world.

The king and I and the populace approached the hut cautiously. There was no
hope of capturing our man without loss of life, for from a hole in the wall
projected the muzzle of an extremely well-cared-for gun--the only gun in the
state that could shoot. Namgay Doola had narrowly missed a villager just before
we came up.

The standing army stood.

It could do no more, for when it advanced pieces of sharp shale flew from the
windows. To these were added from time to time showers of scalding water. We
saw red beads bobbing up and down within. The family of Namgay Doola were
aiding their sire. Blood-curdling yells of defiance were the only answer to our
prayers.

"Never," said the king, puffing, "has such a thing befallen my state. Next year
I will certainly buy a little cannon." He looked at me imploringly.

"Is there any priest in the kingdom to whom he will listen?" said I, for a
light was beginning to break upon me.

"He worships his own god," said the prime minister. "We can but starve him
out."

"Let the white man approach," said Namgay Doola from within. "All others I will
kill. Send me the white man."

The door was thrown open and I entered the smoky interior of a Thibetan hut
crammed with children. And every child had flaming red hair. A freshgathered
cow's tail lay on the floor, and by its side two pieces of black velvet--my
black velvet--rudely hacked into the semblance of masks.

"And what is this shame, Namgay Doola?" I asked.

He grinned more charmingly than ever. "There is no shame," said he. "I did but
cut off the tail of that man's cow. He betrayed me. I was minded to shoot him,
sahib, but not to death. Indeed, not to death; only in the legs."

"And why at all, since it is the custom to pay revenue to the king? Why at
all?"

"By the god of my father, I cannot tell," said Namgay Doola.

"And who was thy father?"

"The same that had this gun." He showed me his weapon, a Tower musket, bearing
date 1832 and the stamp of the Honorable East India Company.

"And thy father's name?" said I.

He obeyed, and I understood whence the puzzling accent in his speech came.
"Thimla Dhula!" said he, excitedly. "To this hour I worship his god."

"May I see that god?"

"In a little while--at twilight time."

"Rememberest thou aught of thy father's speech?"

"It is long ago. But there was one word which he said often. Thus, ''Shun!'
Then I and my brethren stood upon our feet, our hands to our sides, thus."

"Even so. And what was thy mother?"

"A woman of the Hills. We be Lepchas of Darjiling, but me they call an
outlander because my hair is as thou seest."

The Thibetan woman, his wife, touched him on the arm gently. The long parley
outside the fort had lasted far into the day. It was now close upon twilight--
the hour of the Angelus. Very solemnly the red-headed brats rose from the floor
and formed a semicircle. Namgay Doola laid his gun aside, lighted a little oil-
lamp, and set it before a recess in the wall. Pulling back a wisp of dirty
cloth, he revealed a worn brass crucifix leaning against the helmet badge of a
long-forgotten East India Company's regiment. "Thus did my father," he said,
crossing himself clumsily. The wife and children followed suit. Then, all
together, they struck up the wailing cham that I heard on the hillside:

"Dir bane mard-i-yemen dir To weeree ala gee."

I was puzzled no longer. Again and again they sung, as if their hearts would
break, their version of the chorus of "The Wearing of the Green":

"They're hanging men and women, too, For the wearing of the green,."

A diabolical inspiration came to me. One of the brats, a boy about eight years
old--could he have been in the fields last night?--was watching me as he sung.
I pulled out a rupee, held the coin between finger and thumb, and looked--only
looked--at the gun leaning against the wall. A grin of brilliant and perfect
comprehension overspread his porringer-like face. Never for an instant stopping
the song, he held out his hand for the money, and then slid the gun to my hand.
I might have shot Namgay Doola dead as he chanted, but I was satisfied. The
inevitable blood-instinct held true. Namgay Doola drew the curtain across the
recess. Angelus was over.

"Thus my father sung. There was much more, but I have forgotten, and I do not
know the purport of even these words, but it may be that the god will
understand. I am not of this people, and I will not pay revenue."

"And why?"

Again that soul-compelling grin. "What occupation would be to me between crop
and crop? It is better than scaring bears. But these people do not understand."

He picked the masks off the floor and looked in my face as simply as a child.

"By what road didst thou attain knowledge to make those deviltries?" I said,
pointing.

"I cannot tell. I am but a Lepcha of Darjiling, and yet the stuff"--

"Which thou hast stolen," said I.

"Nay, surely. Did I steal? I desired it so. The stuff--the stuff. What else
should I have done with the stuff?" He twisted the velvet between his fingers.

"But the sin of maiming the cow--consider that."

"Oh, sahib, the man betrayed me; the heifer's tail waved in the moonlight, and
I had my knife. What else should I have done? The tail came off ere I was
aware. Sahib, thou knowest more than I."

"That is true," said I. "Stay within the door. I go to speak to the king." The
population of the state were ranged on the hillside. I went forth and spoke.

"O king," said I, "touching this man, there be two courses open to thy wisdom.
Thou canst either hang him from a tree--him and his brood--till there remains
no hair that is red within thy land."

"Nay," said the king. "Why should I hurt the little children?"

They had poured out of the hut and were making plump obeisances to everybody.
Namgay Doola waited at the door with his gun across his arm.

"Or thou canst, discarding their impiety of the cow-maiming, raise him to honor
in thy army. He comes of a race that will not pay revenue. A red flame is in
his blood which comes out at the top of his head in that glowing hair. Make him
chief of thy army. Give him honor as may befall and full allowance of work, but
look to it, oh, king, that neither he nor his hold a foot of earth from thee
henceforward. Feed him with words and favor, and also liquor from certain
bottles that thou knowest of, and he will be a bulwark of defense. But deny him
even a tuftlet of grass for his own. This is the nature that God has given him.
Moreover, he has brethren"--

The state groaned unanimously.

"But if his brethren come they will surely fight with each other till they die;
or else the one will always give information concerning the other. Shall he be
of thy army, oh, king? Choose"

The king bowed his head, and I said:

"Come forth, Namgay Doola, and command the king's army. Thy name shall no more
be Namgay in the mouths of men, but Patsay Doola, for, as thou hast truly said,
I know."

Then Namgay Doola, never-christened Patsay Doola, son of Timlay Doola-which is
Tim Doolan--clasped the king's feet, cuffed the standing army, and hurried in
an agony of contrition from temple to temple making offerings for the sin of
the cattle--maiming.

And the king was so pleased with my perspicacity that he offered to sell me a
village for 20 pounds sterling. But I buy no village in the Himalayas so long
as one red head flares between the tail of the heaven-climbing glacier and the
dark birch forest.

I know that breed.



THE RECRUDESCENCE OF IMRAY

Imray had achieved the impossible. Without warning, for no conceivable motive,
in his youth and at the threshold of his career he had chosen to disappear from
the world--which is to say, the little Indian station where he lived. Upon a
day he was alive, well, happy, and in great evidence at his club, among the
billiard-tables. Upon a morning he was not, and no manner of search could make
sure where he might be. He had stepped out of his place; he had not appeared at
his office at the proper time, and his dog-cart was not upon the public roads.
For these reasons and because he was hampering in a microscopical degree the
administration of the Indian Empire, the Indian Empire paused for one
microscopical moment to make inquiry into the fate of Imray. Ponds were
dragged, wells were plumbed, telegrams were dispatched down the lines of
railways and to the nearest seaport town--1,200 miles away--but Imray was not
at the end of the drag-ropes nor the telegrams. He was gone, and his place knew
him no more. Then the work of the great Indian Empire swept forward, because it
could not be delayed, and Imray, from being a man, became a mystery--such a
thing as men talk over at their tables in the club for a month and then forget
utterly. His guns, horses, and carts were sold to the highest bidder. His
superior officer wrote an absurd letter to his mother, saying that Imray had
unaccountably disappeared and his bungalow stood empty on the road.

After three or four months of the scorching hot weather had gone by, my friend
Strickland, of the police force, saw fit to rent the bungalow from the native
landlord. This was before he was engaged to Miss Youghal--an affair which has
been described in another place--and while he was pursuing his investigations
into native life. His own life was sufficiently peculiar, and men complained of
his manners and customs. There was always food in his house, but there were no
regular times for meals. He ate, standing up and walking about, whatever he
might find on the sideboard, and this is not good for the insides of human
beings. His domestic equipment was limited to six rifles, three shotguns, five
saddles, and a collection of stiff-jointed masheer rods, bigger and stronger
than the largest salmon rods. These things occupied one half of his bungalow,
and the other half was given up to Strickland and his dog Tietjens--an enormous
Rampur slut, who sung when she was ordered, and devoured daily the rations of
two men. She spoke to Strickland in a language of her own, and whenever, in her
walks abroad she saw things calculated to destroy the peace of Her Majesty the
Queen Empress, she returned to her master and gave him information. Strickland
would take steps at once, and the end of his labors was trouble and fine and
imprisonment for other people. The natives believed that Tietjens was a
familiar spirit, and treated her with the great reverence that is born of hate
and fear One room in the bungalow was set apart for her special use. She owned
a bedstead, a blanket, and a drinking-trough, and if any one came into
Strickland's room at night, her custom was to knock down the invader and give
tongue till some one came with a light. Strickland owes his life to her. When
he was on the frontier in search of the local murderer who came in the grey
dawn to send Strickland much further than the Andaman Islands, Tietjens caught
him as he was crawling into Strickland's tent with a dagger between his teeth,
and after his record of iniquity was established in the eyes of the law, he was
hanged. From that date Tietjens wore a collar of rough silver and employed a
monogram on her night blanket, and the blanket was double-woven Kashmir cloth,
for she was a delicate dog.

Under no circumstances would she be separated from Strickland, and when he was
ill with fever she made great trouble for the doctors because she did not know
how to help her master and would not allow another creature to attempt aid.
Macarnaght, of the Indian Medical Service, beat her over the head with a gun,
before she could understand that she must give room for those who could give
quinine.

A short time after Strickland had taken Imray's bungalow, my business took me
through that station, and naturally, the club quarters being full, I quartered
myself upon Strickland. It was a desirable bungalow, eight-roomed, and heavily
thatched against any chance of leakage from rain. Under the pitch of the roof
ran a ceiling cloth, which looked just as nice as a whitewashed ceiling. The
landlord had repainted it when Strickland took the bungalow, and unless you
knew how Indian bungalows were built you would never have suspected that above
the cloth lay the dark, three-cornered cavern of the roof, where the beams and
the under side of the thatch harbored all manner of rats, hats, ants, and other
things.

Tietjens met me in the veranda with a bay like the boom of the bells of St.
Paul's, and put her paws on my shoulders and said she was glad to see me.
Strickland had contrived to put together that sort of meal which he called
lunch, and immediately after it was finished went out about his business. I was
left alone with Tietjens and my own affairs. The heat of the summer had broken
up and given place to the warm damp of the rains. There was no motion in the
heated air, but the rain fell like bayonet rods on the earth, and flung up a
blue mist where it splashed back again. The bamboos and the custard apples, the
poinsettias and the mango-trees in the garden stood still while the warm water
lashed through them, and the frogs began to sing among the aloe hedges. A
little before the light failed, and when the rain was at its worst, I sat in
the back veranda and heard the water roar from the eaves, and scratched myself
because I was covered with the thing they called prickly heat. Tietjens came
out with me and put her head in my lap, and was very sorrowful, so I gave her
biscuits when tea was ready, and I took tea in the back veranda on account of
the little coolness I found there. The rooms of the house were dark behind me.
I could smell Strickland's saddlery and the oil on his guns, and I did not the
least desire to sit among these things. My own servant came to me in the
twilight, the muslin of his clothes clinging tightly to his drenched body, and
told me that a gentleman had called and wished to see some one. Very much
against my will, and because of the darkness of the rooms, I went into the
naked drawing-room, telling my man to bring the lights. There might or might
not have been a caller in the room--it seems to me that I saw a figure by one
of the windows, but when the lights came there was nothing save the spikes of
the rain without and the smell of the drinking earth in my nostrils. I
explained to my man that he was no wiser than he ought to be, and went back to
the veranda to talk to Tietjens. She had gone out into the wet and I could
hardly coax her back to me--even with biscuits with sugar on top. Strickland
rode back, dripping wet, just before dinner, and the first thing he said was:

Has any one called?"

I explained, with apologies, that my servant had called me into the drawing-
room on a false alarm; or that some loafer had tried to call on Strickland,
and, thinking better of it, fled after giving his name. Strickland ordered
dinner without comment, and since it was a real dinner, with white tablecloth
attached, we sat down.

At nine o'clock Strickland wanted to go to bed, and I was tired too. Tietjens,
who had been lying underneath the table, rose up and went into the least
exposed veranda as soon as her master moved to his own room, which was next to
the stately chamber set apart for Tietjens. If a mere wife had wished to sleep
out-of-doors in that pelting rain, it would not have mattered, but Tietjens was
a dog, and therefore the better animal. I looked at Strickland, expecting to
see him flog her with a whip. He smiled queerly, as a man would smile after
telling some hideous domestic tragedy. "She has done this ever since I moved in
here."

The dog was Strickland's dog, so I said nothing, but I felt all that Strickland
felt in being made light of. Tietjens encamped outside my bedroom window, and
storm after storm came up, thundered on the thatch, and died away. The
lightning spattered the sky as a thrown egg spattered a barn door, but the
light was pale blue, not yellow; and looking through my slit bamboo blinds, I
could see the great dog standing, not sleeping, in the veranda, the hackles
alift on her back, and her feet planted as tensely as the drawn wire rope of a
suspension bridge. In the very short pauses of the thunder I tried to sleep,
but it seemed that some one wanted me very badly. He, whoever he was, was
trying to call me by name, but his voice was no more than a husky whisper. Then
the thunder ceased and Tietjens went into the garden and howled at the low
moon. Somebody tried to open my door, and walked about and through the house,
and stood breathing heavily in the verandas, and just when I was falling asleep
I fancied that I heard a wild hammering and clamoring above my head or on the
door.

I ran into Strickland's room and asked him whether he was ill and had been
calling for me. He was lying on the bed half-dressed, with a pipe in his mouth.
"I thought you'd come," he said. "Have I been walking around the house at all?"

I explained that he had been in the dining-room and the smoking-room and two or
three other places; and he laughed and told me to go back to bed. I went back
to bed and slept till the morning, but in all my dreams I was sure I was doing
some one an injustice in not attending to his wants. What those wants were I
could not tell, but a fluttering, whispering, bolt-fumbling, luring, loitering
some one was reproaching me for my slackness, and through all the dreams I
heard the howling of Tietjens in the garden and the thrashing of the rain.

I was in that house for two days, and Strickland went to his office daily,
leaving me alone for eight or ten hours a day, with Tietjens for my only
companion. As long as the full light lasted I was comfortable, and so was
Tietjens; but in the twilight she and I moved into the back veranda and cuddled
each other for company. We were alone in the house, but for all that it was
fully occupied by a tenant with whom I had no desire to interfere. I never saw
him, but I could see the curtains between the rooms quivering where he had just
passed through; I could hear the chairs creaking as the bamboos sprung under a
weight that had just quitted them; and I could feel when I went to get a book
from the dining-room that somebody was waiting in the shadows of the front
veranda till I should have gone away. Tietjens made the twilight more
interesting by glaring into the darkened rooms, with every hair erect, and
following the motions of something that I could not see. She never entered the
rooms, but her eyes moved, and that was quite sufficient. Only when my servant
came to trim the lamps and make all light and habitable, she would come in with
me and spend her time sitting on her haunches watching an invisible extra man
as he moved about behind my shoulder. Dogs are cheerful companions.

I explained to Strickland, gently as might be, that I would go over to the club
and find for myself quarters there. I admired his hospitality, was pleased with
his guns and rods, but I did not much care for his house and its atmosphere. He
heard me out to the end, and then smiled very wearily, but without contempt,
for he is a man who understands things. "Stay on," he said, "and see what this
thing means. All you have talked about I have known since I took the bungalow.
Stay on and wait. Tietjens has left me. Are you going too?"

I had seen him through one little affair connected with an idol that had
brought me to the doors of a lunatic asylum, and I had no desire to help him
through further experiences. He was a man to whom unpleasantnesses arrived as
do dinners to ordinary people.

Therefore I explained more clearly than ever that I liked him immensely, and
would he happy to see him in the daytime, but that I didn't care to sleep under
his roof. This was after dinner, when Tietjens had gone out to lie in the
veranda.

"'Pon my soul, I don't wonder," said Strickland, with his eyes on the ceiling-
cloth. "Look at that."

The tails of two snakes were hanging between the cloth and the cornice of the
wall. They threw long shadows in the lamp-light. "If you are afraid of snakes,
of course"--said Strickland. "I hate and fear snakes, because if you look into
the eyes of any snake you will see that it knows all and more of man's fall,
and that it feels all the contempt that the devil felt when Adam was evicted
from Eden. Besides which its bite is generally fatal, and it bursts up trouser
legs."

"You ought to get your thatch over-hauled," I said. "Give me a masheer rod, and
we'll poke 'em down."

"They'll hide among the roof beams," said Strickland. "I  can't stand snakes
overhead. I'm going up. If I shake 'em down, stand by with a cleaning-rod and
break their backs."

I was not anxious to assist Strickland in his work, hut I took the loading-rod
and waited in the dining-room, while Strickland brought a gardener's ladder
from the veranda and set it against the side of the room. The snake tails drew
themselves up and disappeared. We could hear the dry rushing scuttle of long
bodies running over the baggy cloth. Strickland took a lamp with him, while I
tried to make clear the danger of hunting roof snakes between a ceiling cloth
and a thatch, apart from the deterioration of property caused by ripping out
ceiling-cloths.

"N o n s en s e " said Strickland. "They're sure to hide near the walls by the
cloth. The bricks are too cold for 'em, and the heat of the room is just what
they like." He put his hands to the corner of the cloth and ripped the rotten
stuff from the cornice. It gave great sound of tearing, and Strickland put his
head through the opening into the dark of the angle of the roof beams. I set my
teeth and lifted the loading-rod, for I had not the least knowledge of what
might descend.

"H'm," said Strickland; and his voice rolled and rumbled in the roof. "There's
room for another set of rooms up here, and, by Jove! some one is occupying em."

"Snakes?" I said down below.

"No. It's a buffalo. Hand me up the two first joints of a masheer rod, and I'll
prod it. It's lying on the main beam."

I handed up the rod.

"What a nest for owls and serpents! No wonder the snakes live here," said
Strickland, climbing further into the roof. I could see his elbow thrusting
with the rod. "Come out of that, whoever you are! Look out! Heads below there!
It's tottering."

I saw the ceiling-cloth nearly in the centre of the room bag with a shape that
was pressing it downward and downward toward the lighted lamps on the table. I
snatched a lamp out of danger and stood back. Then the cloth ripped out from
the walls, tore, split, swayed, and shot down upon the table something that I
dared not look at till Strickland had slid down the ladder and was standing by
my side.

He did not say much, being a man of few words, but he picked up the loose end
of the table-cloth and threw it over the thing on the table.

"It strikes me," said he, pulling down the lamp, "our friend Imray has come
back. Oh! you would, would you?"

There was a movement under the cloth, and a little snake wriggled out, to be
back-broken by the butt of the masheer rod. I was sufficiently sick to make no
remarks worth recording.

Strickland meditated and helped himself to drinks liberally. The thing under
the cloth made no more signs of life.

"Is it Imray?" I said.

Strickland turned back the cloth for a moment and looked. "It is Imray," he
said, "and his throat is cut from ear to ear."

Then we spoke both together and to ourselves:

"That's why he whispered about the house."

Tietjens, in the garden, began to bay furiously. A little later her great nose
heaved upon the dining-room door.

She sniffed and was still. The broken and tattered ceiling-cloth hung down
almost to the level of the table, and there was hardly room to move away from
the discovery.

Then Tietjens came in and sat down, her teeth bared and her forepaws planted.
She looked at Strickland.

"It's bad business, old lady," said he. "Men don't go up into the roofs of
their bungalows to die, and they don't fasten up the ceiling-cloth behind 'em.
Let's think it out."

"Let's think it out somewhere else," I said.

"Excellent idea! Turn the lamps out. We'll get into my room."

I did not turn the lamps out. I went into Strickland's room first and allowed
him to make the darkness. Then he followed me, and we lighted tobacco and
thought. Strickland did the thinking. I smoked furiously because I was afraid.

"Imray is back," said Strickland. "The question is, who killed Imray? Don't
talk--I have a notion of my own. When I took this bungalow I took most of
Imray's servants. Imray was guileless and inoffensive, wasn't he?"

I agreed, though the heap under the cloth looked neither one thing nor the
other.

"If I call the servants they will stand fast in a crowd and lie like Aryans.
What do you suggest?"

"Call 'em in one by one," I said.

"They'll run away and give the news to all their fellows," said Strickland.

"We must segregate 'em. Do you suppose your servant knows anything about it?"

"He may, for aught I know, hut I don't think it's likely. He has only been here
two or three days."

"What's your notion?" I asked.

"I can't quite tell. How the dickens did the man get the wrong side of the
ceiling-cloth?"

There was a heavy coughing outside Strickland's bedroom door. This showed that
Bahadur Khan, his body-servant, had waked from sleep and wished to put
Strickland to bed.

"Come in," said Strickland. "It is a very warm night, isn't it?"

Bahadur Khan, a great, green-turbaned, six-foot Mohammedan, said that it was a
very warm night, but that there was more rain pending, which, by his honor's
favor, would bring relief to the country.

"It will be so, if God pleases," said Strickland, tugging off his hoots. "It is
in my mind, Bahadur Khan, that I have worked thee remorselessly for many days--
ever since that time when thou first came into my service. What time was that?"

"Has the heaven-born forgotten? It was when Imray Sahib went secretly to Europe
without warning given, and I--even I--came into the honored service of the
protector of the poor."

"And Imray Sahib went to Europe?"

"It is so said among the servants."

"And thou wilt take service with him when he returns?"

"Assuredly, sahib. He was a good master and cherished his dependents."

"That is true. I am very tired, but I can go buck-shooting tomorrow. Give me
the little rifle that I use for black buck; it is in the case yonder."

The man stooped over the case, banded barrels, stock, and fore-end to
Strickland, who fitted them together. Yawning dolefully, then he reached down
to the gun-case, took a solid drawn cartridge, and slipped it into the breech
of the .360 express.

"And Imray Sahib has gone to Europe secretly? That is very strange, Bahadur
Khan, is it not?"

"What do I know of the ways of the white man, heaven-born?"

"Very little, truly. But thou shalt know more. It has reached me that Imray
Sahib has returned from his so long journeyings, and that even now he lies in
the next room, waiting his servant."

"Sahib!"

The lamp-light slid along the barrels of the rifle as they leveled themselves
against Bahadur Khan's broad breast.

"Go, then, and look!" said Strickland. "Take a lamp. Thy master is tired, and
he waits. Go!"

The man picked up a lamp and went into the dining-room, Strickland following,
and almost pushing him with the muzzle of the rifle. He looked for a moment at
the black depths behind the ceiling-cloth, at the carcass of the mangled snake
under foot, and last, a grey glaze setting on his face, at the thing under the
table-cloth.

"Hast thou seen?" said Strickland, after a pause.

"I have seen. I am clay in the white man's hands. What does the presence do?"

"Hang thee within a month! What else?"

"For killing him? Nay, sahib, consider. Walking among us, his servants, he cast
his eyes upon my child, who was four years old. Him he bewitched, and in ten
days he died of the fever. My child!"

"What said Imray Sahib?"

"He said he was a handsome child, and patted him on the head; wherefore my
child died. Wherefore I killed Imray Sahib in the twilight, when he came back
from office and was sleeping. The heaven-born knows all things. I am the
servant of the heaven-born."

Strickland looked at me above the rifle, and said, in the vernacular: "Thou art
witness to this saying. He has killed."

Bahadur Khan stood ashen grey in the light of the one lamp. The need for
justification came upon him very swiftly.

"I am trapped," he said, "but the offence was that man's. He cast an evil eye
upon my child, and I killed and hid him. Only such as are served by devils," he
glared at Tietjens, crouched stolidly before him, "only such could know what I
did."

"It was clever. But thou shouldst have lashed him to the beam with a rope. Now,
thou thyself wilt hang by a rope. Orderly!"

A drowsy policeman answered Strickland's call. He was followed by another, and
Tietjens sat still.

"Take him to the station," said Strickland. "There is a case toward."

"Do I hang, then?" said Bahadur Khan, making no attempt to escape and keeping
his eyes on the ground.

"If the sun shines, or the water runs, thou wilt hang," said Strickland.
Bahadur Khan stepped back one pace, quivered, and stood still. The two
policemen waited further orders.

"Go!" said Strickland.

"Nay; but I go very swiftly," said Bahadur Khan. "Look! I am even now a dead
man."

He lifted his foot, and to the little toe there clung the head of the half-
killed snake, firm fixed in the agony of death.

"I come of land-holding stock," said Bahadur Khan, rocking where he stood. "It
were a disgrace for me to go to the public scaffold, therefore I take this way.
Be it remembered that the sahib's shirts are correctly enumerated, and that
there is an extra piece of soap in his washbasin. My child was bewitched, and I
slew the wizard. Why should you seek to slay me? My honor is saved, and--and--I
die."

At the end of an hour he died as they die who are bitten by the little kariat,
and the policeman bore him and the thing under the table-cloth to their
appointed places. They were needed to make clear the disappearance of Imray.

"This," said Strickland, very calmly, as he climbed into bed, "is called the
nineteenth century. Did you hear what that man said?"

"I heard," I answered. "Imray made a mistake."

"Simply and solely through not knowing the nature and coincidence of a little
seasonal fever. Bahadur Khan has been with him for four years."

I shuddered. My own servant had been with me for exactly that length of time.
When I went over to my own room I found him waiting, impassive as the copper
head on a penny, to pull off my boots.

"What has befallen Bahadur Khan?" said I.

"He was bitten by a snake and died; the rest the sahib knows," was the answer.

"And how much of the matter hast thou known?"

"As much as might be gathered from one coming in the twilight to seek
satisfaction. Gently, sahib. Let me pull off those boots."

I had just settled to the sleep of exhaustion when I heard Strickland shouting
from his side of the house:

"Tietjens has come back to her room!"

And so she had. The great deer-hound was couched on her own bedstead, on her
own blanket, and in the next room the idle, empty ceiling-cloth wagged light-
heartedly as it flailed on the table.



MOTI GUJ--MUTINEER

ONCE upon a time there was a coffee-planter in India who wished to clear some
forest land for coffee-planting. When he had cut down all the trees and burned
the underwood, the stumps still remained. Dynamite is expensive and slow fire
slow. The happy medium for stump-clearing is the lord of all beasts, who is the
elephant. He will either push the stump out of the ground with his tusks, if he
has any, or drag it out with ropes. The planter, therefore, hired elephants by
ones and twos and threes, and fell to work. The very best of all the elephants
belonged to the very worst of all the drivers or mahouts; and this superior
beast's name was Moti Guj. He was the absolute property of his mahout, which
would never have been the case under native rule; for Moti Guj was a creature
to be desired by kings, and his name, being translated, meant the Pearl
Elephant. Because the British government was in the land, Deesa, the mahout,
enjoyed his property undisturbed. He was dissipated. When he had made much
money through the strength of his elephant, he would get extremely drunk and
give Moti Guj a beating with a tent-peg over the tender nails of the forefeet.
Moti Guj never trampled the life out of Deesa on these occasions, for he knew
that after the beating was over, Deesa would embrace his trunk and weep and
call him his love and his life and the liver of his soul, and give him some
liquor. Moti Guj was very fond of liquor--arrack for choice, though he would
drink palm-tree toddy if nothing better offered. Then Deesa would go to sleep
between Moti Guj's forefeet, and as Deesa generally chose the middle of the
public road, and as Moti Guj mounted guard over him, and would not permit
horse, foot, or cart to pass by, traffic was congested till Deesa saw fit to
wake up.

There was no sleeping in the daytime on the planter's clearing: the wages were
too high to risk. Deesa sat on Moti Guj's neck and gave him orders, while Moti
Guj rooted up the stumps--for he owned a magnificent pair of tusks; or pulled
at the end of a rope--for he had a magnificent pair of shoulders--while Deesa
kicked him behind the ears and said he was the king of elephants. At evening
time Moti Guj would wash down his three hundred pounds' weight of green food
with a quart of arrack, and Deesa would take a share, and sing songs between
Moti Guj's legs till it was time to go to bed. Once a week Deesa led Moti Guj
down to the river, and Moti Gui lay on his side luxuriously in the shallows,
while Deesa went over him with a coir swab and a brick. Moti Guj never mistook
the pounding blow of the latter for the smack of the former that warned him to
get up and turn over on the other side. Then Deesa would look at his feet and
examine his eyes, and turn up the fringes of his mighty ears in case of sores
or budding ophthalmia. After inspection the two would come up with a song from
the sea, Moti Guj, all black and shining, waving a torn tree branch twelve feet
long in his trunk, and Deesa knotting up his own long wet hair.

It was a peaceful, well-paid life till Deesa felt the return of the desire to
drink deep. He wished for an orgy. The little draughts that led nowhere were
taking the manhood out of him.

He went to the planter, and "My mother's dead," said he, weeping.

"She died on the last plantation two months ago, and she died once before that
when you were working for me last year," said the planter, who knew something
of the ways of nativedom.

"Then it's my aunt, and she was just the same as a mother to me," said Deesa,
weeping more than ever. "She has left eighteen small children entirely without
bread, and it is I who must fill their little stomachs," said Deesa, beating
his head on the floor.

"Who brought the news?" said the planter.

"The post," said Deesa.

"There hasn't been a post here for the past week. Get back to your lines!",

"A devastating sickness has fallen on my village, and all my wives are dying,"
yelled Deesa, really in tears this time.

"Call Chihun, who comes from Deesa's village," said the planter. "Chihun, has
this man got a wife?"

"He?" said Chihun. "No. Not a woman of our village would look at him. They'd
sooner marry the elephant!"

Chihun snorted. Deesa wept and bellowed.

"You will get into a difficulty in a minute," said the planter. "Go back to
your work!"

"Now I will speak Heaven's truth," gulped Deesa, with an inspiration. "I
haven't been drunk for two months. I desire to depart in order to get properly
drunk afar off and distant from this heavenly plantation. Thus I shall cause no
trouble."

A flickering smile crossed the planter's face. "Deesa," said he, "you've spoken
the truth, and I'd give you leave on the spot if anything could be done with
Moti Guj while you're away. You know that he will only obey your orders."

"May the light of the heavens live forty thousand years. I shall be absent but
ten little days. After that, upon my faith and honor and soul, I return. As to
the inconsiderable interval, have I the gracious permission of the heaven-born
to call up Moti Guj?"

Permission was granted, and in answer of Deesa's shrill yell, the mighty tusker
swung out of the shade of a clump of trees where he had been squirting dust
over himself till his master should return.

"Light of my heart, protector of the drunken, mountain of might, give ear!"
said Deesa, standing in front of him.

Moti Guj gave ear, and saluted with his trunk. "I am going away," said Deesa.

Moti Guj's eyes twinkled. He liked jaunts as well as his master. One could
snatch all manner of nice things from the roadside then.

"But you, you fussy old pig, must stay behind and work."

The twinkle died out as Moti Guj tried to look delighted. He hated stump-
hauling on the plantation. It hurt his teeth.

"I shall be gone for ten days, oh, delectable one! Hold up your near forefoot
and I'll impress the fact upon it, warty toad of a dried mud-puddle." Deesa
took a tent-peg and banged Moti Guj ten times on the nails. Moti Guj grunted
and shuffled from foot to foot.

"Ten days," said Deesa, "you will work and haul and root the trees as Chihun
here shall order you. Take up Chihun and set him on your neck!" Moti Guj curled
the tip of his trunk, Chihun put his foot there, and was swung on to the neck.
Deesa handed Chihun the heavy ankus--the iron elephant goad.

Chihun thumped Moti Guj's bald head as a paver thumps a curbstone.

Moti Guj trumpeted.

"Be still, hog of the backwoods! Chihun's your mahout for ten days. And now bid
me goodbye, beast after mine own heart. Oh, my lord, my king! Jewel of all
created elephants, lily of the herd, preserve your honored health; be virtuous.
Adieu!"

Moti Guj lapped his trunk round Deesa and swung him into the air twice. That
was his way of bidding him goodbye.

"He'll work now," said Deesa to the planter. "Have I leave to go?"

The planter nodded, and Deesa dived into the woods. Moti Guj went back to haul
stumps.

Chihun was very kind to him, but he felt unhappy and forlorn for all that.
Chihun gave him a ball of spices, and tickled him under the chin, and Chihun's
little baby cooed to him after work was over. and Chihun's wife called him a
darling; but Moti Guj was a bachelor by instinct, as Deesa was. He did not
understand the domestic emotions. He wanted the light of his universe back
again--the drink and the drunken slumber, the savage beatings and the savage
caresses.

None the less he worked well, and the planter wondered. Deesa had wandered
along the roads till he met a marriage procession of his own caste, and,
drinking, dancing, and tippling, had drifted with it past all knowledge of the
lapse of time.

The morning of the eleventh day dawned, and there returned no Deesa, Moti Guj
was loosed from his ropes for the daily stint. He swung clear, looked round,
shrugged his shoulders, and began to walk away, as one having business
elsewhere.

"Hi! ho! Come back you!" shouted Chihun. "Come back and put me on your neck,
misborn mountain! Return, splendor of the hillsides! Adornment of all India,
heave to, or I'll bang every toe off your forefoot!"

Moti Guj gurgled gently, but did not obey. Chihun ran after him with a rope and
caught him up. Moti Guj put his ears forward, and Chihun knew what that meant,
though he tried to carry it off with high words.

"None of your nonsense with me," said he. "To your pickets, devil-son!"

"Hrrump!" said Moti Guj, and that was all--that and the forebent ears.

Moti Guj put his hands in his pockets, chewed a branch for a toothpick, and
strolled about the clearing, making fun of the other elephants who had just set
to work.

Chihun reported the state of affairs to the planter, who came out with a dog-
whip and cracked it furiously. Moti Guj paid the white man the compliment of
charging him nearly a quarter of a mile across the clearing and "Hrrumphing"
him into his veranda. Then he stood outside the house, chuckling to himself and
shaking all over with the fun of it, as an elephant will.

"We'll thrash him," said the planter. "He shall have the finest thrashing ever
elephant received. Give Kala Nag and Nazim twelve foot of chain apiece, and
tell them to lay on twenty."

Kala Nag--which means Black Snake--and Nazim were two of the biggest elephants
in the lines, and one of their duties was to administer the graver punishment,
since no man can beat an elephant properly.

They took the whipping-chains and rattled them in their trunks as they sidled
up to Moti Guj, meaning to hustle him between them. Moti Guj had never, in all
his life of thirty-nine years, been whipped, and he did not intend to begin a
new experience. So he waited, waving his head from right to left, and measuring
the precise spot in Kala Nag's fat side where a blunt tusk could sink deepest.
Kala Nag had no tusks; the chain was the badge of his authority; but for all
that, he swung wide of Moti Guj at the last minute, and tried to appear as if
he had brought the chain out for amusement. Nazim turned round and went home
early. He did not feel fighting fit that morning, and so Moti Guj was left
standing alone with his ears cocked.

That decided the planter to argue no more, and Moti Guj rolled back to his
amateur inspection of the clearing. An elephant who will not work and is not
tied up is about as manageable as an eighty-one-ton gun loose in a heavy
seaway. He slapped old friends on the back and asked them if the stumps were
coming away easily; he talked nonsense concerning labor and the inalienable
rights of elephants to a long 'nooning'; and, wandering to and fro, he
thoroughly demoralized the garden till sundown, when he returned to his picket
for food.

"If you won't work, you sha'n't eat," said Chihun, angrily. "You're a wild
elephant, and no educated animal at all. Go back to your jungle."

Chihun's little brown baby was rolling on the floor of the hut, and stretching
out its fat arms to the huge shadow in the doorway. Moti Guj knew well that it
was the dearest thing on earth to Chihun. He swung out his trunk with a
fascinating crook at the end, and the brown baby threw itself, shouting, upon
it. Moti Guj made fast and pulled up till the brown baby was crowing in the air
twelve feet above his father's head.

"Great Lord!" said Chihun. "Flour cakes of the best, twelve in number, two feet
across and soaked in rum, shall be yours on the instant, and two hundred pounds
weight of fresh-cut young sugar-cane therewith. Deign only to put down safely
that insignificant brat who is my heart and my life to me!"

Moti Guj tucked the brown baby comfortably between his forefeet, that could
have knocked into toothpicks all Chihun's hut, and waited for his food. He ate
it, and the brown baby crawled away. Moti Guj dozed and thought of Deesa. One
of many mysteries connected with the elephant is that his huge body needs less
sleep than anything else that lives. Four or five hours in the night suffice--
two just before midnight, lying down on one side; two just after one o'clock,
lying down on the other. The rest of the silent hours are filled with eating
and fidgeting, and long grumbling soliloquies.

At midnight, therefore, Moti Guj strode out of his pickets, for a thought had
come to him that Deesa might be lying drunk somewhere in the dark forest with
none to look after him. So all that night he chased through the undergrowth,
blowing and trumpeting and shaking his ears. He went down to the river and
blared across the shallows where Deesa used to wash him, hut there was no
answer. He could not find Deesa, but he disturbed all the other elephants in
the lines, and nearly frightened to death some gypsies in the woods.

At dawn Deesa returned to the plantation. He had been very drunk in deed, and
he expected to get into trouble for outstaying his leave. He drew a long breath
when he saw that the bungalow and the plantation were still uninjured, for he
knew something of Moti Guj's temper, and reported himself with many lies and
salaams. Moti Guj had gone to his pickets for breakfast. The night exercise had
made him hungry.

"Call up your beast," said the planter; and Deesa shouted in the mysterious
elephant language that some mahouts believe came from China at the birth of the
world, when elephants and not men were masters. Moti Guj heard and came.
Elephants do not gallop They move from places at varying rates of speed. If an
elephant wished to catch an express train he could not gallop, but he could
catch the train. So Moti Guj was at the planter's door almost before Chihun
noticed that he had left his pickets. He fell into Deesa's arms trumpeting with
joy, and the man and beast wept and slobbered over each other, and handled each
other from head to heel to see that no harm had befallen

"Now we will get to work," said Deesa. "Lift me up, my son and my joy!"

Moti Guj swung him up, and the two went to the coffee-clearing to look for
difficult stumps.

The planter was too astonished to be very angry.





End of The Project Gutenberg Etext of The Works of Rudyard Kipling

